To: J3                                                          J3/00-140r1
From: JOR                                                       page 1 of 2
Date: March 1, 2000
Subject: Async/Volatile fixups

This paper addresses various problems with the ASYNCHRONOUS and VOLATILE 
attributes, mostly from paper 00-129.

Malcolm asked why we require an explicit interface for objects with these 
attributes which are dummy arguments.  This restriction was added so the 
compiler could use pass by descriptor, and avoid copyin/copyout.  Using 
copyin/copyout would almost certainly cause unexpected behavior/wrong answers
in this context.  Malcolm also pointed out a few omissions in how these 
attributes are handled.  

JOR has decided to adopt Malcolm's suggestion for cleaning up what types of
dummy arguments can have the ASYNC attribute, and to apply the same mechanisms
to VOLATILE dummys.

Simply, an actual argument that is (easily) known to be contiguous can always be
an actual argument corresponding to a dummy argument with the ASYNC or VOLATILE
attribute.  Possibly non-contiguous objects (but regularly shaped) can be passed
if the dummy argument is assumed shape.  This forces the actual & dummy to be 
the same rank/shape.  

Although the standard does not prohibit using copyin/copyout under these 
restrictions, we know of no implementations that do the copies.  A suitable
hint for implementors is included in the edits to ensure that copyin/copyout
is not used for dummy arguments with these attributes.

One remaining question was whether or not to require an explicit interface for
these dummy arguments all the time.  An explicit interface would allow the
compiler to check for cases where a compiler has to use copyin/copyout 
(such as passing a POINTER to a routine with an implicit interface is one
common example), and issue an error.  For now, we have decided to leave this
restriction in place, and add a few suitable constraints so the compiler can
prevent the users from shooting themselves in the foot too often.  If we choose
not to require the explicit interface for all routines which contain a dummy 
argument with one of these attributes, then the constraints will become plain
normative text (not a constraint).

Paper 00-132 contains edits to prohibit vector valued subscripted arrays from 
being passed to a dummy argument with these attributes, since copyin/copyout 
is always required in this case.

Malcolm asked if a called procedure was expected to implicitly WAIT if any
dummy args were ASYNCHRONOUS.  The answer is NO.

Subgroup decided to not require a dummy arg to have the ASYNC attribute
just because the actual argument does.  The general rule (big hammer) is
already present 5.1.2.12 [77:29-?], and removing the restriction allows more
flexibility for knowledgable users.  Volatile has the same sort of requirements
as async after this change.  This change also allows intrinsics to be called
with objects having the ASYNC attribute, as long as the object is not
currently a pending I/O storage sequence affector.
								


											J3/00-140r1
											page 2 of 2
Malcolm asked if we really wanted to require the base object of a part-ref to be
ASYNCHRONOUS just because a part-ref was.  We do, and also for all the part-
ref's to also be asynchronous, to enable a more efficient compiler 
implementation.



EDITS to J3/00-007:

  Section 5.1.2.12 [77:35]
    change "ASYNCRONOUS" to "ASYNCHRONOUS"


  Section 5.1.2.12 [77:37-38]: delete these two lines.

| Section 5.1.2.12 [77:44-45]: delete “provided by some processors”

  Section 12.2.1.1 [244:16], change
    ", and"
  to
    ", whether it has the ASYNCHRONOUS attribute (5.1.2.12), whether it has 
     the VOLATILE attribute (5.1.2.13), and" 

  Section 12.4.1.2 [260:15+] (after not 12.26), add

    The following additional constraints apply to the syntax rule defining
    actual arguments (R1219).

    Constraint: If an actual argument is an array section or an assumed-shape
    array, and the corresponding dummy argument has either the VOLATILE or 
    ASYNCHRONOUS attributes, that dummy argument shall be an assumed-shape
    array.

    Constraint: If an actual argument is a pointer array, and the corresponding
    dummy argument has either the VOLATILE or ASYNCHRONOUS attributes, that
    dummy argument shall be an assumed-shape array or a pointer array.
|
    Note
|   The constraints on actual arguments that correspond to a 
    dummy argument with either the ASYNCHRONOUS or VOLATILE attribute are
    designed to avoid forcing a processor to use the so-called copyin/copyout
    argument passing mechanism.  Making a copy of actual arguments whose values
    are likely to change due to an asynchronous I/O operation completing or in
    some non-predictable manner will cause the new values to be inaccessible 
    via the dummy argument, and may cause those new values to be lost when a
    called procedure returns and "copyout" overwrites the actual argument.
    END NOTE


