From: /DATA                                                    J3/00-222
Subject: Subgroup Disposition of 00-190 and 00-191           Meeting 153

00-190:

The subgroup felt that the specific edit suggested was subject to possible
misinterpretation, but included an alternative clarification in 00-169r1.


00-191:

1. The standard consistently uses the word "name" for a specific syntactic
   form defined in 3.2.1.  The word "identifier" does not have a uniform
   meeting throughout the standard.  It is used in its English language
   sense of being something that identifies something else and is typically
   used when the identifier is or may be something other than a name.

   Because the specific meaning of "identifier" is local to the sections
   where it is being used, the subgroup did not feel it appropriate to
   try to provide an all-encompassing definition of it in 2.5.1 or the
   glossary.

2. In 11.3.2, the word "identifier" is used because the syntactic term
   <generic-spec> includes possibilities other than a name.  The phrase
   "local identifier" is referring to an identifier that has meaning in
   the local scoping unit (i.e., the one containing the USE statement).
   This is in contrast to "identifier of the entity in the referenced
   module".  A general replacement of "identifier" by "local identifier"
   in this section would be incorrect.

   The subgroup did feel that it might be appropriate to add text to
   clarify the meaning of "identifier" in this section but did not wish
   to attempt to write that clarification at this meeting, so it is
   inserting an unresolved issue note at this point.

3. Point (3) was attempting to enumerate the syntactic forms that are
   allowed in a <rename>, but since this point is about entities that do
   not appear in a <rename>, it is partially incorrect.  An edit to
   repair this text is included below.

4. Note 4.41 is talking specifically about names, so use of the more
   general term "identifier" would be inappropriate.  (Also, "identifier"
   has been given no specific meaning in this section.)


EDIT:
[240:26-27]  Replace "name or defined operator" by "identifier" (twice)
   and insert "or <use-defined-operator>" after "<use-name>".
