
                                                                      J3/00-343

Date:	  13 December, 2000
To:	  J3
From:	  Steidel, /interop
Subject:  Unresolved issue 110

The first paragraph of unresolved issue 110 states there is no syntax which
allows a language binding spec on a procedure.  Since the note was written, the
syntax rules have been added to chapter 12 on the SUBROUTINE, FUNCTION, ENTRY,
and PROCEDURE statements.  The note assumes two preceeding restrictions will be
moved to follow the syntax.  The restrictions remain where they are at as the
syntax allowing a language binding spec for procedures is located in four spots
in chapter 12, and the restrictions need only be stated once in section 16.2.6,
Interoperation with C Functions.

The second paragraph states some confusion about the restriction that a language
binding spec cannot be specified for a procedure which requires an explicit
interface unless the procedure is defined by a Fortran subprogram.  The intent
of the restriction is to prohibit Fortran from calling a C function and passing
POINTERs, assumed shape arrays, allocatable arrays, or any of the other Fortran
features which require and explicit interface to "get it right".   The "unless"
clause permitted a Fortran procedure to call a procedure with a language binding
spec if the procedure itself is written in Fortran, in which case it is alright
to pass POINTERS, assumed shape arrays, and allocatable arrays as the called
procedure is also written in Fortan.  Subgroup decided to remove the "unless"
clause as the primary use of BIND is to make interlanguage calls, not to make
intra-Fortran calls.  Note 16.18 states what is prohibited by the second
restriction.  The following edit removes the "unless" clause.

The third paragraph of the unresolved issue points out an obvious problem with
the second restriction.  That is, if a procedure has a language binding spec, it
requires and explicit interface to be called, and the restriction says such a
procedure must not have a language binding spec.  The following edit rewords the
restriction to remove the problem.

Edit: Page 399:26-27 replace with
	"A <language-binding-spec> shall not be specified for a
	procedure that requires an explicit interface for any reason
	other than the presence of the <language-binding-spec>."
		
Delete unresolved issue 110.

Edit: Page 399:33-47 delete

Miscellaneous fixes in 16.2.6

Edit: Page 398:16 change "theh" to "the"

Data objects have attributes.  Function result variables are data objects,
procedures are not.   Thus, it is incorrect to refer to procedures with the BIND
attribute.  Modify second to the last sentence of 16.2.6 to fix this.

Edit: Page 399:25 change "The BIND attribute" to "A
	<language-binding-spec>"

Notes to editor: The BIND(C) is modified by an edit in 336 to read merely BIND.
As this sentence refers to asterisk dummy arguments (alternate return
subroutines), the sentence should be in obsolesent font.
