From:  Kurt W. Hirchert                        J3/00-349 (Page 1 of 1)
Subject:  Alternative approach to issue 211                Meeting 155


                       J3/00-349 (Page 1 of 1)
(This  isn’t really issue 211; it’s a problem that came up while  looking
at issue 211.  However, it must be resolved before issue 211 can be.)

Background:
  
  1.   Component values in a structure constructor can be specified either
     positionally or by keyword.  Specifying them by keyword has advantages in
     clarity, but it is approximately twice as verbose in cases where the
     values are expressed simply.
2.   Extended types offer present a different choice in constructors.
The “nested” form specifies values for the parent component and any
additional components in the type definition.  The nested form is always
available in the module where the type is defined.  The “flattened” form
replaces the value for the parent component with the values that would be
used to construct such a value in a constructor for the parent type.  The
flattened form is available if and only if a constructor for the parent
type is available in this scoping unit.  If the parent type is itself
extended, you potentially have the same choice between a nested and a
flattened specification of those components.  This gives rise to various
partially flattened forms and a fully flattened form that goes all the
way back to the base type.
3.   In paper 00-346, Malcolm provides an example of an ambiguity that
sometimes exists between the fully flattened form and one or more of the
nested forms.  For the ambiguity to exist, the following must be true:
       
       a.   The fully flattened form must be available.
b.   The fully flattened form of one of the ancestor types (typically,
the base type) must consist solely of a pointer that can point to that
type.
c.   The constructor must be expressed positionally.
d.   The supplied value must be a valid target for such a pointer.
     
     Malcolm  provides  a  persuasive argument that in  such  cases,  the
     likely  intended meaning is the fully flattened form.  His  proposal
     to  eliminate  the  ambiguity is to disallow the  position  notation
     except for the fully flattened form.

In  other  words,  to  eliminate  an ambiguity  that  exists  only  under
specialized  circumstances,  Malcolm  proposes  to  disallow   the   most
convenient  notation  except  in the form that  is  least  likely  to  be
available  for  an extended type!  This strikes me as being  “too  big  a
hammer” for this problem.  I suggest a more limited solution.  Ideally, I
would  simply  say that the ambiguous case is interpreted  as  being  the
fully  flattened form, but that would still make some of the  unambiguous
forms  difficult to parse because you wouldn’t know how to interpret  the
first  value  until  you examined the later values  in  the  constructor.
Instead,  I  suggest that if the fully flattened form is  available,  the
first  component in that form is a pointer, the first component value  is
specified positionally, and the first component value is a valid  target,
then the constructor is interpreted as being in flattened form.

Under my proposal, if a user wishes to write a nested form, he can either
switch  to the keyword notation as in Malcolm’s proposal, or he can  make
the  first  component specification an expression that  is  not  a  valid
target.

I  have not yet worked out the edits for my proposal, but I felt I should
at  least  present  the gist of it before the committee adopts  Malcolm’s
“big hammer” approach.
                                    
                                    ?
