                                                       J3 01-169R1
To:      J3
From:    /interop
Date:    21 March 2001
Subject: VALUE and INTENT(IN), unresolved issue 161

Part 1:

At least two vendors on the committee are implementing
interoperability features of the F2K draft standard.  Both
vendors have received complaints about the VALUE attribute
implying INTENT(IN).  C programmers are accustomed to
modifying the value of formal parameters of a function without
changing the value of the actual arguments to the function.
That is, value formal parameters are often used as local
variables during the execution of the function without changing
the value of the associated actual arguments.  The following
edits remove the implicit INTENT(IN) of the VALUE attribute.

Edit: [77:22-23] replace with

     The VALUE attribute specifies a type of argument association
     (12.4.1) for a dummy argument and an actual argument which
     becomes associated with it. A dummy argument with the VALUE
     attribute has no INTENT.

Part 2:

Unresolved issue 116 states that we need to talk about how arguments
get associated with C formal parameters.  Argument association
happens as with Fortran calling Fortran except when a dummy
argument in an interface has the VALUE attribute.  An edit
is applied to Section 12.4.1, Actual arguments, dummy arguments
and argument association, to describe argument association when
the VALUE attribute is specified.

Edit: [255:32+] add new paragraph and a note

	If the dummy argument has the VALUE attribute it becomes
	associated with a definable anonymous data object whose
	initial value is that of the actual argument. Subsequent
	changes to the definition status of the dummy argument
	do not affect the actual argument.

Note 12.x x

     Fortran argument association is usually similar to call
     by reference and call by value-result.
     If the VALUE attribute is specified, the effect is
     as if the actual argument is assigned to a temporary, and the
     temporary is then argument associated with the
     dummy argument.  The actual mechanism by which this happens is
     determined by the companion processor.

End note.

Edit: [270:25-27] delete unresolved issue 161
