                                                       J3 01-169
To:      J3
From:    /interop
Date:    20 March 2001
Subject: VALUE and INTENT(IN), unresolved issue 161

Part 1:

At least two vendors on the committee are implementing
interoperability features of the F2K draft standard.  Both
vendors have received complaints about the VALUE attribute
implying INTENT(IN).  C programmers are accustomed to
modifying the value of formal parameters of a function without
changing the value of the actual arguments to the function.
That is, value formal parameters are often used as local
variables during the execution of the function without changing
the value of the associated actual arguments.  The following
edits remove the implicit INTENT(IN) of the VALUE attribute.

Edit: [77:22-23] replace with

     The VALUE attribute specifies a type of argument association
     (12.4.1) for a dummy argument and an actual argument which
     becomes associated with it. A dummy argument with the VALUE
     attribute has no INTENT.

[65:8] Replace "INTENT(INOUT), or INTENT(OUT)" with "or INTENT"

Part 2:

Unresolved issue states we need to talk about how arguments
get associated with C formal parameters.  Argument association
happens as with Fortran calling Fortran except when a dummy
argument in an interface has the VALUE attribute.  An edit
is applied to Section 12.4.1, Actual arguments, dummy arguments
and argument association, to describe argument association when
the VALUE attribute is specified. Note, if the edit in part 1 does
not pass, the second sentence of the following edit to page
256 is unnecessary.

Edit: [256:15+] add new paragraph

     If the dummy argument has the VALUE attribute, the value of
     the actual argument becomes associated with the dummy argument.
     The dummy argument may appear in a variable
     definition context (14.7.7) without changing the associated
     actual argument's value or definition status (14.7).

Note 12.x x

     Fortran argument association is by default call by reference
     (address).  If the VALUE attribute is specified, the effect is
     as if the actual argument is assigned to a temporary, and the
     temporary is then argument associated (by reference) with the
     dummy argument.  The actual mechanism by which this happens is
     determined by the companion processor.

End note.

Edit: [270:25-27] delete unresolved issue 161
