
                                                         J3/01-232

Date:    June 2, 2001
To:      J3
From:    Aleksandar Donev <donev@pa.msu.edu>
Subject: The need for C-like array pointers in Fortran


In my extensive work in Fortran 95 on algorithms using graph
and tree-like dynamic data-structures I have found a very strong need for
C-like array pointers, and have recently concluded that exitsting
workarounds in F95 are unsatisfactory and will further deter the usage of
Fortran in certain areas of computer science.

I wish to document my need with an example and propose a possible addition
to accomodate for this need:

Assume we wish to represent a graph (an object that is a collection of
vertices, or points, and a collection of edges, or lines, connecting the
vertices) with adjacency lists. This means that for each vertex we want to
have a list of the edges that are incident upon it.
One standard representation is to make two integer arrays, one which I will
call NEIGHBOURS, and another which I will call MY_NEIGHBOURS. Assuming we
number the nodes from 1 to N, then the elements:
NEIGHBOURS(MY_NEIGHBOURS(I):MY_NEIGHBOURS(I+1)-1)
give the indices of the nodes that neighbour node I. In a sense, we
represent the list of neighbours using an array, and concatenate all of
these small arrays into one big array NEIGHBOURS, and we use the array
MY_NEIGHBOURS to chop the large array into pieces.

This representation is efficient and can be used in FORTRAN 77. However
it suffers from a lack of modularity and dynamic character, which I feel is
not necessary to describe in detail, since they are relatively obvious.
A much more dynamic and easier to use
in a modular fashion is an approach in which each node is a user-defined
data-type that contains its list of nodes. Depending on the kind of dynamic
character needed, many schemes are possible, but I will use a very simple
one sufficient to illustrate my point:

TYPE vertex
   INTEGER, DIMENSION(:), POINTER :: neighbors ! The list of neighbors
END TYPE vertex

Now, one has freedom of where the neighbors are stored and how they are
allocated, and can simply use pointer assignment on neighbors to change
this. For efficiency reasons, one would almost always allocate a large array
NEIGHBOURS when initializing the graph, and then chop this array into small
pieces, this time using the array pointer neighbours instead of the global
index array MY_NEIGHBOURS. An example code segment might be:

TYPE(vertex), DIMENSION(N) :: V ! Vertex set
INTEGER, DIMENSION(N*d) :: N ! Neighbour set, d is maximal degree
INTEGER :: vertex, counter, degree

counter=1
DO vertex=1, N
  degree=... ! Assign value
  V(vertex)%neighbors=>N(counter:counter+degree) ! Pointer assignment
  counter=counter+degree
END DO

This approach is nice to use and allows one to have freedom in how the
neighbour lists are allocated, for example.

The above code has a big efficiency problem though, which is very important
in practice. The array pointer neighbours in the type vertex usually takes a
lot of memory, since the array pointer concept of Fortran 90 requires that
adress, stride and bound information be stored. The compilers I have used
usually pad this to some large value such as 16 or 32 bytes. This storage
requirement is excessive and in many cases not necessary. For example,
stride information is often not needed since the user knows that he will
only use memory contigous blocks, and in some cases, such as skip linked
search lists, the size (bound) information is also not needed.

In my opinion, if one had a C-like array pointers in Fortran 90, similar to
assumed-size array arguments, that is, deferred-shape arrays which rely on
sequence association and do not store an array descriptor, but rather just a
memory address (C-pointer), then efficient implementations of very
sophisticated dynamic data-structures are possible.

One possible syntax for this is to add a deffered-shape dimension
declaration that has a * in the last dimension, just like assumed-size
array arguments. For example, here is a possible declaration of the type
vertex with this approach:

TYPE vertex
   INTEGER :: degree=0
   INTEGER, DIMENSION(*), POINTER :: neighbours
END TYPE vertex

then the assignment of the neighbour list in the above code would be
substituted with:

V(vertex)%degree=degree
V(vertex)%neighbors=>N(counter) ! Or maybe N(counter:)
   ! Or maybe N(counter:counter+degree)

I can not say with certainty how such a syntax would fit into the standard,
and would greatly appreciate suggestions from J3. However, I strongly
believe in the need for this kind of contiguous deferred-shape arrays, and
have strong Fortran 95 experience to support this claim. I have advocated,
taught and used Fortran 95 extensively, and believe this change will make
the language much more attractive to computer scientists. Applications
include better interfacing with C (think of buffer creation for MPI
applications, interfacing with external C-based memory allocators, better
interfacing with FORTRAN 77 procedures accepting assumed-size arguments,
etc.)

Also, since we have assumed-size arrays in Fortran, the same restrictions
that apply to these inside procedures (such as the fact that they can not be
used in array statments without explicit bounds, or can not be used in
certain array inquiry functions, etc.), can be applied in this case. So I
expect this will not require a big change of the standard. I may be wrong of
course.

There are other changes that I would like to see in F2k, particularly
pertaining to adding features for restricting aliasing of pointers in the
form of programmer guarantees for non-alising, but the above addition is
becoming increasingly important as I program more dynamic data-structures
and use C graph libraries (which are abundant). So I am very interested in
seeing this considered carefully by committee members.

Thank you for your time,
Aleksandar
______________
Physics and Astronomy Department, Michigan State University
http://www.pa.msu.edu/~donev
