
                                                      J3/01-333r2

From:    Dan Nagle
To:      J3
Date:    23 Aug 01
Subject: Flesh Out Intro

A Paper for WG5, N1459, paraphrased the list in the Introduction
to the CD.  It has been suggested that the language in that paper would actually
improve the list in the introduction.  This paper makes the change.

Edits:

Replace [xiv:10-31] with the following list:

o  Derived type enhancements: parameterized derived types
   (allowing the kind, length, or shape of a derived type's
   components to be chosen when the derived type is used), mixed
   component accessibility (where different components have different
   accessibility), public entities of private type, improved
   structure constructors, and finalizers.

o  Object oriented programming support: inheritance
   (where one type extends the
   definition of another type), polymorphism (where the type of a
   variable may vary at runtime), dynamic type allocation,
   SELECT TYPE construct (which allows a choice of execution flow
   depending upon which type a polymorphic object currently has),
   and type-bound procedures.

o  The ASSOCIATE construct (which allows a complex expression or object
   to be denoted by a simple symbol).

o  Data manipulation enhancements: allocatable components,
   deferred type parameters, VOLATILE attribute, explicit type specification
   in array constructors, INTENT specification of pointer arguments,
   specified lower bounds of pointer assignment and pointer rank remapping,
   extended initialization expressions, MAX and MIN intrinsics for character
   type, and enhanced complex constants.

o  Input/output enhancements: asynchronous transfer
   operations (where a program can continue to process data while an
   input/output transfer occurs), stream access (which facilitates
   access to a file without reference to any record structure), user
   specified transfer operations for derived types, user specified
   control of rounding during format conversions,
   named constants for preconnected units, regularization of input/output
   keywords, and access to input/output error messages.

o  Abstract interfaces (which give names for specified interfaces)
   and pointers to procedures.

o  Scoping enhancements: the ability to rename defined
   operators (which supports greater data abstraction) and control
   of host association into interface bodies.

o  Support for IEC 60559 (IEEE 754) exceptions and arithmetic
   (to the extent a processor's arithmetic supports the IEC standard).

o  Interoperability with the C programming language (allowing
   portable access to many libraries and the low-level facilities
   provided by C and allowing the portable use of Fortran libraries
   by programs written in C).

o  Support for international usage: (ISO 10646) and choice of
   decimal or comma in numeric formatted input/output.

o  Enhanced integration with the host operating system:
   access to command line arguments
   and environment variables, and access to the
   processor's error messages (which allows the program to better
   process exceptional conditions).