
                                                        J3/02-102

Date:        7 Dec 2001
To:          J3
From:        R. Maine
Subject:     Changes to list of unresolved issues

The following are changes made to the list of unresolved issues.
These changes are reflected in 02-011 and in the J3 notes of
02-007.

These changes add 11 new issues, resolve 2, and change 0.  This
makes a total of 356 issues, 337 of which have been resolved,
and 19 of which remain.

I. Resolved issues

  Paper 01-364r1 resolved issues 319 and 336.

II. Changed unresolved issues

  The LaTeX conversion of 01-007r4 acidentally changed issue 344
  to a regular note (10.13) instead of a J3 note.  I changed it
  back to a j3 note (but it wouldn't surprise me to find that a
  paper from this same meeting resolves it, making this moot).

III. New unresolved issues

  paper 01-363r2

    issue 346 - USE only in ISO_C_BINDING

      Paper J3/01-363R2 completely reversed the previous
      specification on the matter of additional public entities
      in the ISO_C_BINDING module.  That's ok, but....
      I find it odd that not a single one of the examples
      in the standard follows the recommendation now
      stated here.  If we believe in this recommendation,
      we should follow it.  If we find that too annoying to
      do, then....draw your own conclusion.

      While cross-checking this question, I don't seem to have
      found whether we even addressed the question for the
      IEEE modules.  Perhaps we should.  The first para of
      clause 14 says that it is processor-dependent which of
      the named constants in IEEE_FEATURES is provided, but
      I can't find anything about whether there might be
      additional public names in any of the IEEE modules.

      Later.  Oh, I see that paper 01-361r2 added something in
      13.8 to cover the IEEE modules, so that part might now be
      ok.

    issue 347 - Interop with procedure arguments

      Paper J3/01-363r2 added the above phrase about dummy
      procedure arguments.  Either I'm missing something or
      this addition was done without adequate attention to
      integration.  A dummy procedure can't have the VALUE
      attribute, so apparently it would fall under item 6
      below.  Can anyone explain to me what item 6 even means
      in such a case?  Don't forget to cover the case of
      subroutines (which don't have a type).

      This is probably solvable (though I suspect it will
      take quite a few more words).  But I'm a liitle
      concerned to see us adding integration problems
      instead of solving them.  This being integration with
      something 3 lines below isn't that awfully obscure.
      Perhaps I'm just misreading this.

  paper 01-355r3

    issue 348 - PRIVATE accessibility

      Paper 01-355r3 claimed to have clarified the first sentence
      of the above paragraph about the accessibility attribute.
      However, it ``clarified'' it to make it self-contradictory.
      If an identifier is accessible in a module by USE
      association, then it obviously *IS* accessible outside of
      the module; indeed it was defined outsize of the module.

  paper 01-373r2

    issue 349 - processor-dependent order

      Paper 01-373r2 added the above "processor-dependent order"
      replacing the prior "any order".  However, this makes no sense
      as written.  The processor doesn't determine the order of
      the program units.  The processor might place requirements on
      what the order has to be (namely that modules must be processed
      before they are used), but that's not what this says.

      Even if we grant that reading of these words, this apparently
      innocuous wording change introduces a major incompatability and
      portability problem relative to all prior standards.  The note
      below, which prompted this change, refers only to requiring
      modules to be processed first.  The change to the normative
      text, however, is *FAR* broader.  It implies that a processor
      might, for example, require that the program units be in
      alphabetical order.  Do we really want to explicitly give
      processors permission to invent such spurious incompatibilities,
      with not even a hint as to what constitutes a reasonable
      expectation?

  paper 01-385r1

    issue 350 - selector not present

      Shouldn't the above requirement that the selector be present be
      mentioned in 12.4.1.6?

  paper 01-394r1

    issue 351 - boz and REAL

      The above expression for the result of boz arguments to
      REAL does not give a reasonable result for anything other
      than default real.  The INT(A) gives a default integer
      result, which then doesn't TRANSFER reasonably to anything
      other than a default real.

      If I may make a suggestion, perhaps we should use a
      different descriptive model.  We seem to be somewhat unable
      to decide on what a boz actually is.  I've been assuming
      that a boz constant was of type integer.  They are, after
      all, described in the section on integer types.  But on
      closer reading, I don't see that we actually say they are
      of type integer.  We do say in a few places that they are
      interpreted as if they were, but we don't say that they
      actually are.  The edits of paper 01-394r1 clearly don't
      consider boz literals to actually be of type integer - if
      so, it would be nonsense to say that the arguments to, for
      example the INT intrinsic, could be "of type integer, real,
      or complex, or a boz-literal-constant."

      Treating boz constants as integers is going to make it
      difficult to use them on intrinsic reals larger than the
      largest supported integer kind.  Lots of processors have
      this situation.  It is common for the largest supported
      integer to be 32 bits, yet have 64-bit reals.  Some
      processors support 64-bit integers, but then many of those
      also support 128-bit reals.  EVen if we stick to the
      integers, there is the problem of representing negative
      integers of the largest supported integer kind.

      Perhaps we should go ahead and describe boz literals as
      typeless.  We do, after all, specifically limit them to
      situations where their type doesn't matter (and this is
      intentional).  Perhaps that is too controversial; I offer
      it only as a suggestion.  In any case, the existing words
      describe behavior that I'm pretty sure would be a surprise
      to everyone.

  paper 01-367r1

    issue 352 - USE ONLY

      The above para in c.8.2.1 has high maintenance costs.  :-)
      I tried to rewrite it, but gave up because I couldn't
      actually figure out which of several points it was trying
      to make.

      The usage of "present" is very misleading here.  ONLY has
      no relationship to dummy arguments.  And I really could not
      tell what the business of "every accessed identifier being
      present" was trying to say anyway.  I thought at first it
      was trying to say that the source of every accessed entity
      was explicitly declared.  These words say absolutely nothing
      like that, but that would at least connect to the conclusion
      in the following sentence.  I almost made that change before
      it occured to me that one might imagine a benefit to
      "every accessed entity appearing", even though that benefit
      is not the one implied by the following sentence.  At this
      point I gave up.

      On the more trivial side, I suspect that the "each one" is
      intended to modify "identifiers", but as written it modifies
      "program units", which makes little sense.  Also, it is
      slightly jarring to start with "An additional benefit of
      using the ONLY specifier", when none of the preceding stuff
      referred to the ONLY specifier by that term.

  paper 01-362r2

    issue 353 - Inquiry functions

      I made the mistake of reading the definition of "inquiry
      function" given in 13.1 and cited in 14.8.  The usage in
      section 14 does not match this definition.  There are cases
      where it is vague, and others where it is just wrong.  It
      is not clear to me whether it is best to broaden the
      definition or to reclassify some functions.

      The vagueness arises from the use of the term "principal"
      argument".  That term is defined nowhere in the standard.
      The only use of it is in this definition of "inquiry
      function" (and in the same definition in the glossary).  I
      therefore assume that the normal English definition
      applies, but it is a bit vague.  In c13, it is mostly
      clear.  An interpretation as either the first or the most
      important argument likely gives the same result.  Things
      are a little vague for associated, same_type_as, and
      extends_type_of, but I can't argue that it is wrong, and
      the argument descriptions in those intrinsics do at least
      give some details.

      But in c14, some of the arguments that need not be defined
      are not the first argument, and are also at least arguably
      not the most important, thus making it pretty hard to
      justify that the label "principal" argument is sufficient
      identification.  For example, in IEEE_SUPPORT_FLAG and
      IEEE_SUPPORT_ROUNDING, the X argument is the second one
      and is optional.  I don't see how one can justify the
      identification of that as the "primary argument".  This is
      vague at best (and I'd say that description was generous).

      For IEEE_SUPPORT_HALTING, it is not vague.  There is only
      one argument, so it must be the principal one.  But it
      clearly does need to be defined.

      Let me take this opportunity to note that we have nothing
      comparable to the 3rd para of 13.2 (about intent(in)) in
      section 14.  It can be deduced from the statement that all
      the functions are pure, but we felt it necessary to spell
      this out in c13, so I'm not sure why not here.  That's
      not an error, so wouldn't have justified an unresolved
      issue on its own, but as long as I'm here...

  paper 01-364r1

    issue 354 - Scoping unit containing an object

      What scoping unit is the one that "contains an object"?
      This term is used in 16.2.4, but its definition is unclear.
      If this is intended to mean the scoping unit where an
      object is declared, then that would imply that the bindings
      with this as their scope were subject to the rules of use
      association, including such things as "use only" and
      renaming.  Is that intended?  If so, you could have an
      object accessible without these bindings being accessible.
      If this is intended to mean any scoping unit where the
      object is accessible, then the bindings would be accessible
      by their original identifiers anywhere that the object was
      accessible, but it seems to me that the bindings might also
      be accessible by another identifier through USE renaming.
      It is not at all clear to me whether the intention is one
      of these two interpretations or something else.

      The sentence also has grammatical number problems in that
      "the scoping unit" implies that there is only one (not one
      per object - one total).  I could fix that aspect of the
      wording if I figured out what was intended technically,
      but I can't decipher the technical intent.

  paper 01-399

    issue 355 - EOR= specifier

      paper 01-399 deleted the lead-in to the numbered list in
      the section on the EOR= specifier.  Something to replace it
      is needed.  I probably could have drafted something, but
      I've spent enough time on this.

      There are presumably conditions under which the list
      applies.  It seems unlikely that it happens for every
      statement (even non-I/O ones).  It seems equally unlikely
      that the conditions are those mentioned in the new version
      of the para before it (insomuch as that para says that
      execution terminates in those condistions).

  from an email

    issue 356 - PAD= for internal files

      Bob Corbett noted in an email that the above para in 9.5.4.4.2
      essentially says that pad mode is ignored for internal reads.  I
      suspect this wording was left over from when we had no way to
      specify the pad mode for internal reads.  Now that we have such
      a way to specify the pad mode, it would be most irregular,
      confusing, and probably contradictory of other words in the
      standard, to ignore it.  Probably this spot just got missed in
      the papers allowing more general pad mode specification.

      I was tempted to just strike the ``or during input from an
      internal file'', but I'm not sure that we call input from
      internal files either advancing or nonadvancing.  Decided the
      fix is best left to J3.
