
                                                         J3/02-253r2

To: J3
From: Dick Hendrickson
Subject: Typos In The 007-R2 Draft
Date: 16 August, 2002


JOR responses to most items, including edits, is in paper 02-259R1.

Responses to other comments, including some edits, are in this paper.

Note:  edits are marked JOR:  EDIT after the question, items with just a
response and no edit are marked JOR:

Page  Line  Comment
17    13-14 What is a subobject of a constant considered to be?  I think it
            should say that it is an expression which may or may not be
            a constant expression, depending on whether the selector is
            a constant or not.

            Or should it be an initialization expression?  There
            appears to be an issues here, including 128:27 which says that
            a subobject of a constant is an initialization expression,
            presumably allowing string(n:n), where n is a variable.

            For example:
                  character(*), parameter :: string = 'abcdefg'
                  type point
                    real x, y
                  end type
                  type(point), parameter ::  origin = point(0.0,0.0)
            We believe origin%x is a constant expression
            whereas string(I:J) is
            is a non-constant expression when I and J are variables, which
            at least 128:27 thinks is an initialization expression.
            The text should say what it is (if it is not stated
            someplace or not implied) or as a note if it is implied by
            the syntax rules and appropriate definitions.
JOR:  We don't think it's a problem, within initialization expressions the
substring selectors, etc, are limited themselves to initialization
expressions.

33    18    Is the reference 4.5.1.5 correct?  Section 4.5.1.5 seems to
            have nothing to do with a subroutine and generic interface with
            the generic specifier "ASSIGNMENT(=)".
            Can a type bound proc redefine assignment?  If so, maybe that
            is why the reference is here.  (We just don't know.)
JOR:  EDIT  33:18, 61:9, 124:4, 124:13, 124:32, 144:6, 144:14, 418:12
            change "4.5.1.5" to "4.5.1"

43    14-16 This appears wrong as it appears to be making the assumption
            that a subobject of a constant is a constant.  For example,
            suppose NAME is a named constant array and I is a
            type-param-name and consider name(I:I) as a type-param-value
            in a data-component-def-stmt somewhere.  This is allowed but
            it is a surprise and bizarre.  It is possibly based on the
            misunderstanding (a very "slippery slope") that a subobject of
            a constant is a constant.
JOR:  No, the constraint applies to the expression, not just the top level
terms.  So an expression like constant_array(I_variable) is disallowed
because it contains a reference to a nonconstant (the I_variable).


JOR:  EDIT  61:8, add "," after "subroutine"


65    20    The concept of a type that is "compatible" with intrinsic
            assignment seems to mixing up this concept (or confusing me at
            least) with the concept "type conformance in intrinsic
            assignment".
            You have defined "compatible types" in the polymorphic sense
            but this is not that concept here.  The text of Section 7
            refers to the concept of type conformance, which I believe is
            the correct term.  Therefore, change "compatible with intrinsic
            assignment to" to "in intrinsic assignment type conformance
            with".  (Also, compare with p. 90, lines 29-32 where the word
            compatible is used where conformance should probably be used.)
JOR:  EDIT  65:20  Change "compatible with intrinsic assignment to" to
"in type conformance with"

96    Section 5.4
            Either as a note (because you think it is implied somehow or
            stated someplace but where) or as a forgotten but intended
            restriction, you should state that a named data object cannot
            be in the same namelist group more than once.  The issue is not
            clear (unless it is stated someplace that I cannot find) because
            the list is like an I/O list for which you can repeat items.  On
            the other hand, it is like a declaration (because it appears in
            the specification part) where the assumption is that a named
            object is not declared twice.  I recommend that you add
            the following sentence (or a note here) after "group" on line
            18, page 96:  "A named data object must not be in
            in the same namelist group more than once."
            This may have been the discussion of an interp that allows
            repeats here, and if so, should be stated as a NOTE.
JOR:  The interp allowed repeated use of the name.  There is no need to
state it here, since without a prohibition it is allowed.

97    33    Insert "sequenced" before "derived type".  This certainly helps
            comprehend what this restriction is saying but it does not
            have the intended meaning if constraint C584 is not part of
            the interpretation.  It is thus redundant, but "sequenced" is
            a very helpful adjective in this sentence.
JOR:  EDIT  97:33 Insert "sequence" before "derived type"

109   19/21 Last sentence: this is only two of other
            prohibited appearances of a many-one array section in a context
            in which the section can become defined (for example, one other
            way is when many-one array section is an actual argument
            corresponding to a dummy argument that has intent(INOUT) or
            intent(OUT), or a dummy argument that is defined, or as an
            internal file, and so on).  I recommended that the sentence be
            modified as follows: "A many-one array section shall not appear
            in any context in which the many-one array section can be
            defined, such as on the left of an equals sign in an
            assignment statement, as in an input item in a READ statement,
            or as an actual argument associated with a dummy argument that
            can become becomes ??defined or undefined.".
JOR:        do not make this change to 109:19-21

113            NOTE 6.19 appears out of place because it explains the text
            on lines 1-3 of page 116 in a different section.  I recommend
            it be located in Section 6.3.3.1 after the quoted text.
JOR:  EDIT  113:NOTE 6.19  Move to 116:3+

126   4-6   This list is not complete.  What about other places which do
            not seem to be covered such as in an item in the I/O list of
            a READ statement, as the only primary which is an item in the
            I/O list of a PRINT or WRITE statement, and as an actual
            argument corresponding to a non-pointer dummy argument (there
            are probably lots more places).
JOR:  Yes, but this is a list of how things are used in expressions.  The
other cases are covered in the appropriate places.

128   NOTE 7.9: Where is the prohibition against recursion for a
            specification function?  It does not appear in the above.
            If it has been left out, then reinstate it here.  If it is
            somewhere else, then have the note refer where the restriction
            is stated.
JOR:  The restriction was deliberately removed for F2K.

17    4-7  This seems to be a change in what a local variable is?
JOR:  Change from what?  F95 only had the definition of variable in this
section.  This definition appears to be correct for "local".

33    1-4  How is passing a value via an assumed-type parameter different
            than argument association?
JOR:  Assumed values are passed by hidden dope vectors, the user doesn't have
anything associated directly with them.  They can't be changed in the program
as normal arguments can be.

86    NOTE 5.23 What does "starts from" mean?
JOR:  Probably a poor word, do you have a better suggestion for an informal
note.  It basically means the first part-ref in the thing it points to.

93    1-5   What is the difference between the name of a procedure pointer
            and a proc-entity-name?
JOR:  We needed a BNF term, not an English language term.
Also, proc-entity-name is any procedure name, not just pointer things.

96    Section 5.4
            Can a named data object appear more than once in a NAMELIST
            group, either in the same statement or in different statements
            with the same namelist group name?
JOR:  Yes, it can, there was an F95 interp about this.

105   9-11  Why the second sentence of this constraint?
JOR:  Without it you could create ragged arrays by having each allocated
thing be of different size

105   15-18 Why is this distinction necessary?  See also NOTE 6.4
JOR:  Has to do with pointer assignment  If A is a thingo, B and C are
normal component things, and P is a pointer component thing, then
    A%B%P = 1
doesn't change anything in A (it changes something off in the weeds).  But
    A%B%P => target
actually changes something in A.
Whereas
    A%P%C = 1
never changes anything in A, it always points off into the weeds

114   26-27 How is it possible to do this?  With polymorphic objects
            somehow or is there some direct way?
JOR:  A monomorphic example would be
Type xx
    Real, pointer ::  y(:))
End type
Type(xx), allocatable ::  a(:)
Integer, pointer :: II(:)
...
nullify ( A(II(7))%y, II)

115   9-11  How is it possible to do this?  With polymorphic objects
            somehow or is there some direct way?
JOR:  Same as previous example, with deallocate (and II allocatable)

116   16    Why does this not include a pointer subobject?  Maybe because
            a pointer have created an object that is also a target and
            automatic deallocation may not be expected or desirable?  Can
            an allocated object be a target in which case the same
            situation can occur.
JOR:  Because a pointer subobject can point to something that it didn't
create.  For example,
Allocate (A,B)
A%P => III
B%P => III
Deallocate (A)
Would cause B%P to be a dangling pointer if the subobjects were magically
deallocated.  A garbage collector could do it, but it would need a usage
count or however those things work.

119   24    Why is a type-param-name not a designator?
JOR:  Because its use is so limited that if it were included in the term
"designator" then there would have to be an exclusion almost everywhere the
term designator was used.
