
                                                          J3/02-304r1

Date:     November 13, 2002
To:       J3
From:     Rob James
Subject:  Allocatable result variables and ENTRY

Introduction
------------
The following code seems to be allowed when it probably shouldn't
be:

FUNCTION foo()
  INTEGER, ALLOCATABLE :: foo
  INTEGER :: bar
  ...
ENTRY bar()
  ...
END FUNCTION

Page 279, lines 18-22 of the Committee Draft state:

    If the characteristics of the result of the function named in
    the ENTRY statement are the same as the characteristics of the
    result of the function named in the FUNCTION statement, their
    result variables identify the same variable, although their
    names need not be the same.  Otherwise, they are storage
    associated and shall be scalars without the POINTER attribute
    and one of the types:  default integer, default real, double
    precision real, default complex, or default logical.

The code above fits into the "otherwise" situation.  So, they
must be scalars (yes, they are) without the POINTER attribute (no
POINTER attribute here), and one of the types mentioned (default
integer is in the list).  Both foo and bar fit those criteria and
are storage associated.  But, for foo, what storage are we talking
about?  Certainly not the dope vector.  Does it mean that the
storage allocated for foo needs to be the same as the storage for
bar?  Does it mean that they can be separate, but need to be kept
synchronized with each other (i.e. the same value at all times)?

All of these suggestions are terrible.  And besides, wasn't this
the reason behind prohibiting the POINTER attribute in this
situation?  The only acceptable solution is to prevent these
function results from having the ALLOCATABLE attribute as well as
the POINTER attribute.


Proposed Edits
--------------
Page and line numbers refer to the Committee Draft.

[279:20-22]  The sentence beginning with "Otherwise" doesn't parse
  well as it is, and simply adding "or ALLOCATABLE" would make the
  problem worse.  So, I propose changing this sentence to the
  following:
    Otherwise, they are storage associated and shall all be
    nonpointer, nonallocatable scalars of type default integer,
    default real, double precision real, default complex, or
    default logical.
