                                    02-310r1

    Technical Changes

To:         J3
From:       Craig Dedo
Date:       November 13, 2002
Subject:    Technical Changes

Date:     28 Oct 2002
To:       J3
From:     Richard Maine
Subject:  Technical changes

The following are proposed public comments relating to technical issues.

1. I believe it to be a mistake to introduce the concept of
   iostat values corresponding to "harmless conditions"
   in the FLUSH statement.  This seems inconsistent with all
   the other IO statements.  For example, rewinding or
   backspacing a file that is already at the initial position
   might be considered a "harmless condition".  Why does it
   have no effect to flush a file that does not exist, but
   causes a "harmless condition" to flush a file that is not
   appropriate for some other reason?  This requirement is also
   arguably contradicted by the first sentence of 9.11.

   Further the normative text describing this condition uses the
   adjective "processor-dependent" so much as to make it
   pointless and ill-defined.  The "such as" does not constitute
   a useful definition, and the bit about inappropriate units is
   in a note, so all we really have is the statement that
   processor-defined negative values indicate processor-defined
   conditions.

   I think this whole concept is a poorly integrated last-minute
   addition that stands out as anomalous.  It is not necessary
   for or unique to the functionality of the FLUSH statement.

J3 recommends the following edits:
[207:11-12] Delete the words starting with "or" and replace with, "or a
processor-dependent negative value if the flush operation is not supported
for the unit specified".

[207:12+]       Delete Note 9.57.

2. I believe the COMPATIBLE rounding mode to be a mistake (and
   to be strangely named).  The only difference between
   COMPATIBLE and NEAREST relies on an exact equality test
   for a floating point value.  Furthermore, this exact equality
   test will often be a test for exact equality to a number that
   cannot be represented exactly (what binary floating-point
   number is exactly halfway between the decimal numbers
   0.1 and 0.2?).  This is the kind of test that programmers
   are incessantly warned against by textbooks and even by some
   compilers.

   It is also manifestly unclear what it is that this mode is
   supposed to be compatible with.  It would seem just as
   meaningful to name the mode RALPH.

J3 Response: J3 believes the feature should stay as it is defined.

References
02-007r3, Fortran 2000 Committee Draft

[End of J3 / 02-310r1]
