
                                                           J3/03-129

To: J3
From: UK Fortran panel
Subject: Edits for UK comment MTC2 (Remove ambiguities re VOLATILE)
Date: 10 March 2003


MTC2 The UK comment was:

    Remove ambiguities re VOLATILE 
  
    The text needs to be clarified to avoid the problem of a variable being
    referenced while it is in the process of being changed.

The description of VOLATILE does not specify whether truly asynchronous
updates are possible, where some bytes (or larger units) of a variable
are updated by one mechanism at the same time as others are retrieved
by another mechanism.  Given this true asynchronicity, the value
retrieved by a VOLATILE variable access could have some bytes from the
old (pre-the-update) value and some from the new (post-the-update)
value.

This combination of partial values could cause trouble with
floating-point numbers (e.g. spuriously providing a signalling NaN),
and is particularly likely to cause trouble with values containing
pointers - using a partially updated pointer could well lead to
immediate uncontrollable program termination (seg fault/bus error).

Possible edits are the following: 

    Page 83: 8+  Add:
    If the value or properties of an object with the VOLATILE attribute
    are changed by means not specified in this standard, any change
    shall appear to the Fortran program as if it had taken place
    immediately before or immediately after the execution of an executable
    Fortran statement.  Furthermore, when executing the statement
    immediately following such a change, the object shall be in a
    consistent state as if it had been changed by operations defined by
    this standard.

    and replace Note 5.23 by: 
    The Fortran processor should use the most recent definition of a
    volatile object when a value is required, should make the most
    recent Fortran definition available, and should ensure that the
    above consistency rule holds.  It is the programmer's
    responsibility to manage the interactions with the non-Fortran
    processes and to obey any constraints documented by the Fortran
    processor.

No other edits are suggested.
