
                                                           J3/03-155r1

To: J3
From:  John Reid
Subject: Treatment of signed zeros by ATAN2, LOG, and SQRT
Date: 31 March 2003

Note: This is a replacement for J3/03-155. I have been persuaded by
Bill Long not to propose edits that affect intrinsics other than 
these three. 

There is a small problem with the wording of the intrinsics ATAN2, LOG,
and SQRT with respect to their treatment of signed zeros. The text was
written before there was any thought of support for IEEE arithmetic and
is fine for nonzero arguments. Wherever possible, the value for a
signed zero should be the limit of those for small values of the same
sign.

For ATAN2(Y,X), there is a problem when X is negative.  If Y is very
small and positive, the result is near pi; if Y is very small and
negative, the result is near -pi. It follows that if Y is plus zero,
the result should be approximately pi and if Y is minus zero, the
result should be approximately -pi. Unfortunately, the present wording
says that the result is pi in both cases.

There is a corresponding problem for the imaginary part of LOG(X) when
X is complex with a negative real part. If the imaginary part of X is
plus zero, the imaginary part of the result should be approximately pi
and for minus zero, it should be approximately -pi. The present wording
says that the result is pi in both cases.

There is a similar problem for the imaginary part of SQRT(X) when X is
complex with negative real part. If the imaginary part of X is small and
positive, the imaginary part of the result should be positive
and if it is small and negative, the imaginary part of the result
should be negative. This should also be so for signed zeros,
but the present wording says that the the imaginary part of the result
is positive in both cases.

I have also taken the opportunity to say that ATAN2(Y,X) has the
value Y when Y=0 and X>0. The current wording says that the result
is zero, which does not specify the sign.  


EDITS

3:20+. Add

  3) If the processor can distinguish between positive and
     negative real zero, this standard requires different returned
     values for ATAN2(Y,X) when X < 0 and Y is negative real zero and
     for LOG(X) and SQRT(X) when X is complex with REAL(X) < 0 and
     negative zero imaginary part.

301:26. Replace < by <=.

301:27:28. Replace sentence 'If Y = 0, ...' by
    If Y = 0 and X > 0, the result is Y.  If Y = 0 and X < 0, the
    result is pi if Y is positive real zero or the processor cannot
    distinguish between positive and negative real zero and -pi if Y is
    negative real zero.

324:14. Replace < by <=.

324:15:16. Replace sentence 'The imaginary part ...' by
    If the real part of X is less than zero and the imaginary part of X
    is zero, the imaginary part of the result is pi if the imaginary
    part of X is positive real zero or the processor cannot distinguish
    between positive and negative real zero and -pi if the imaginary
    part of X is negative real zero.

347:20:21. Replace 'is greater than or equal to zero' by 'has
    the same sign as the imaginary part of X'.
