
                                                           J3/03-221

Date: 04 August 2003
To: J3
From: Richard Maine
Subject: Response to N1558 on Nagging Doubts

Re:  WG5/N1565


                                         ISO/IEC JTC1/SC22/WG5/N1565
From: Richard Maine
		 RESPONSE TO N1558 (NAGGING DOUBTS)
			   29 July 2003

I won't try to address the meat of this paper.  I haven't studied it
well enough yet to do a good job of that.

I wish to note only that I do *NOT* consider these to be "minor"
technical changes (much less "very minor").  I see these as
significant technical questions that we have absolutely no business
in changing in a draft that becomes a FCD.  There is new syntax here.
There are changes in definitions of things that could affect stuff
all over the standard (type compatibility).

If we try anything so foolish, we will get it wrong.  Kurt argues that
we have gotten several of these things wrong.  Perhaps he is correct,
but I believe that in making a last-minute change we would break more
things than we would fix.  The term "last-minute" understates things.
It is far past the last minute.

I don't think this is something that should have been distributed
"some weeks ago"; I'd say more like a year ago.

Although Kurt describes these as decisions made at the recent joint
meeting, most of them look like things that have been around a long
time to me.  In fact, I'm having trouble identifying any related
decisions made at the last meeting; perhaps I missed something, but
this material does not look like fixes of decisions made at the
last meeting to me.  We did make lots of decisions at the last
meeting, and I think that includes mistakes that need fixing, but
I'm having trouble making the connection with the questions of this
paper.

The reallocating assignment is part of the TR, for example.  The only
recent changes relating to it have to do with applying it to extra
cases; Kurt's concerns seem addressed more at the basic functionality
as described in the TR than to those extra cases.

The function side effect question is far from new and although C
interop is new, it isn't new to the joint meeting.  This one can get
very subtle; I'd bet that if we try to say anything of subtsance on it
now, it will be nonsensical in at least some cases and wil result in
interp questions.

Perhaps these are all thing that we really need to fix before going
out with an FCD.  I defer to WG5 on that question.  However, I
strongly feel that if we make changes of this order, we should
slip the schedule by at least 6 months.  I feel it irresponsible
to make such technical changes directly into the FCD.  If we put out
an FCD that has technical flaws because of after-the-last-minute
changes, then it will slip our schedule by a lot more than 6 months
(my understanding is that it kicks us back to the CD stage).

Of course, I have to be suspicious that if we slip the schedule by
6 months, we will just get a bunch more technical changes 6 months
from now.

Are we ready for FCD or not?  If we need to make these kind of changes,
then we aren't ready for it.  To me, that is the most fundamental
question here.

--
Richard Maine                |  Good judgment comes from experience;
Richard.Maine@nasa.gov       |  experience comes from bad judgment.
                             |        -- Mark Twain
