
                                                         J3/02-201

Date: 04 August 2003
To: J3
From: Richard Maine
Subject: Editor's comments on N1523 (03-007)

Re:  WG5/N1524


                                       ISO/IEC JTC1/SC22/WG5 N1524

	        Editor's comments on N1523 (03-007)

                          Richard Maine

This paper has the majority of the editor's comments generated while
creating the J3/03-007 document.  A small number of my comments that
seemed appropriate for separate papers are not included here.

Comments on papers incorporated into 03-007.

  paper 03-104r2
    [474:2]  "may" is not appropriate here; we aren't giving any
    permissions to the C processor.  I'd suggest "might".

  paper 03-108r3
    I don't like the phrase "size in bits of".  The "in bits" doesn't
    fit well between "size" and "of".  Makes it sound like the "of"
    modifies "bits" instead of "size".  Adding "expresssed" doesn't
    help either.

    Also, the wording makes it sound like the file storage unit size
    is required to equal the value of the constant.  I think this is
    backwards.  We don't have a requirement on the file storage unit
    size; it is whatever it is.  The constant is then required to
    equal whatever the file storage unit size is.  So something more
    like

      "The number of bits in a file storage unit is given by the
       constant...".

  paper 03-113r3
    [42:9+] The first sentence of 4.5.6.1 (which this explicitly
    references) says that "an extended type includes *ALL* [my
    emphasis]...nonfinal procedure bindings of its parent type."
    I see no exclusion for deferred bindings.  This appears to
    contradict what I assume is the intent here.

    In fact, I think this points up a flaw in our description of
    tbp overriding.  This isn't new to this paper.  Although we
    talk a lot about the conditions under which overriding
    happens, I can't find that we ever actually say what it means
    to override something.  Apparently it doesn't mean that we
    didn't inherit it (we needed to inherit it before we can even
    determine whether or not it is overridden).

    But does anything actually say that overriding means that we
    will end up resolving to the overriding one instead of the
    inherited one?  I can't find it.  Since an extended type
    includes all nonfinal procedure bindings of its parent type,
    it appears to me that if you also have an overriding binding,
    that both the inherited one and the overriding one are still
    somehow there (and even are part of the "all" bindings passed
    on to further extensions).  I think we are relying too much on
    people just knowing what we mean without us actually saying
    it.  A common flaw, I'm afraid.

    I suspect that what we want to say is that we inherit only
    those bindings that aren't overriden.  We'd then have to
    slightly reword the material on overriding so that it isn't
    self contradictory in referring to an inherited binding that
    it is about to say isn't an inherited binding.  But that
    should be easily solvable.  (Just need a term for the binding
    that might or might not end up being inherited.  Perhaps just
    "the parent binding" would do).  Once we say that the parent
    binding wasn't actually inherited because it was overriden,
    then I think the rest of the questions go away.

    [53:30] "abstract type definition" sounds like a type
    definition that is abstract; i.e. "abstract" modifies
    "definition".  We don't have such a thing.  It suggest this
    would be better as "definition of an abstract type".

    It striked me that NON_OVERRIDABLE and DEFERRED are almost
    anyonyms.  Too bad their names don't give a hint of this.
    Alas, I don't see a good fix, as renaming DEFERRED to something
    like MUST_OVERRIDE doesn't seem like an improvement.

    The choice of when to cross-reference and when not to seems
    arbitrary to the point of confusion.  For example, we have
    several constraints in 4.5.4 that talk about overriding, and
    the *LAST* one of them now xrefs the term.  But then again,
    perhaps lots of things in the document might make more sense
    if read backwards. :-)

    [53:31] Again not new to this paper, but the use of the term
    "binding" seems almost hopelessly confused.  We shouldn't have
    a bnf term <binding> if we are going to use the word "binding"
    to refer to other things.  For example, the addition at
    [53:30] is close after the bnf definition of <binding>, but it
    appears to be talking about something else.  When does
    "binding" mean <binding> and when does it mean something else.
    Apparently a specific binding is a binding, but it isn't a
    <binding>....or something like that.  I've lost track.  I
    think we should use a different bnf term to avoid this
    confusion.  This stuff gets confusing enough without using
    terminology that makes it worse.  This edit brought it to my
    attention because my first reaction was that a binding didn't
    have an interface-name, but I then realized than another paper
    had changed "binding" to "specific binding", which apparently
    changed what bnf this sentence was talking about, since a
    <specific-binding> is not a specific case of a <binding>.

    [56:11+] Someone once went through and got rid of all the places
    where we say that examples "can be found", replacing them with
    more straightforward statements, usually along the lines of
    "For examples of... see...".  Though it doesn't strike me as a
    big deal, we probably should do the same thing here instead of
    making it sound like more of a challenge to find.

    [103:3+] I'm confused about how this can ever come up, but I'll
    assume that's just because I am indeed confused.

    Also, the "In a data-ref bits are redundant with the (R612).
    That's exactly what the (R612) means.  But I realize this is
    copied from the style of the existing constraints.  (They should
    be fixed also.)

    [415:6+] Did you really mean to xref 4.5.7 here?  I'm suspicious
    of a typo for 4.5.3.  But a section labeled "Components" seems
    a strange enough place to look for a definition of "abstract
    type", that I think I'll let J3 fix it.  Perhaps it will
    raise the question of whether that's the right place.

    [418:6+] Do we really need to xref the same section twice in
    a single glossary entry?

    Can a dtv-type-spec use an abstract type?  Doesn't look to
    me like that case was caught.

  paper 03-118r3
    [139:9+7] The table ends up pretty ugly with this para in
    the middle of it.  Not wrong; just ugly.

  paper 03-119r1
    The note example of an ENUM definition no longer conforms
    to the bnf.  I could have done the obvious fix, but this
    points out to me what I regard as a significant technical
    issue that I hadn't noticed before...but I'll save that
    for a separate paper.

    [381:10] This statement no longer appears correct.  I don't
    see how a set of named constants "corresponds to a C type".

    [471-472] The edits on these pages leave the Fortran code
    incompatible with the C prototype at [471:1-2].  I could have
    made the obvious fix, but I'll do it as specified so as to
    give J3 the opportunity to review it.

  paper 03-120r1
    [387:5+4] Not new to this paper, but my grammar ear says that
    the "has" in the first sentence of this note (15.12) should
    be "have" because of the "requires that".

  paper 03-121r1
    [219:19]  The "possibly preceded" seems to contradict the
    "immediately".  Also, it isn't clear what the repeat specifier
    might precede (the P edit descriptor?).

    Also, If we were going to change this anyway, why wouldn't we
    just get rid of the arcane part and just say "After a P edit
    descritor".  I can't offhand see any cases that would cause
    problems.  This avoids questions like why it is that the comma
    is required before an "I" edit descriptor, or a DT one.  Why
    stop at the particular place specified here?

  paper 03-126
    Ok in what it does.  But now that you point it out...  Why is
    14.7 inconsistent with 14.9.21.  They both give definitions of
    what "support" means for ieee_support_datatype, and the
    definitions aren't the same.  Seems best to only say this
    once, but if we do say it twice, they might at least agree.

  paper 03-125r1
    I generally find "if any" qualifiers obtrusive and better
    handled other ways (or just omitted).  I see that I let two
    more of them slip by here while my attention was on the
    technical content.  Oh well.

  paper 03-130r2
    I don't think it wise to use the term "specification" here;
    makes it sound like something that would be in a specification
    statement.

    Also it is inconsistent to say, in the [225:30] edit that the
    input field "is..an IEEE exceptional specification", but then
    in the next edit ([226:3-]) to talk about "the input field for
    an IEEE exceptional specification".  Is such a specification
    actually an input field or is it something that has an input
    field for it?  It makes no sense to say "the input field for
    the input field", which is what I see implied by putting these
    two edits together.

    Seems slightly odd that we describe the exceptional cases
    last for input, but first for output.

    I find several of the "otherwises" to be ambiguous or confusing;
    they have a very tacked-on appearance (and I'd say that the
    appearance was accurate).  For example, the "otherwise" added
    on [226:14] manages to make it sound like it has something to
    do with scale factor of zero.  It is not *AT ALL* clear to me
    that this "otherwise" covers the next several paras, including
    statements like that Ew.d shall not be used if the |exp|>999
    (which you specify that it will be for Infinities).

    I'd think that we might want this stuff to apply to infinities
    and NaNs regardless of whether or not they were the IEEE ones.
    If the processor supported non-IEEE datatypes that had infinities
    and NaNs, then I'd hope I/O would still follow these rules, but
    I suppose that's out of scope of the original request and could
    be considered an "obvious processor extension".

  paper 03-131r1
    The line for IEEE_SUPPORT_UNDERFLOW_CONTROL doesn't typeset
    very well in 14.9.1.  The macros used don't deal very well
    when both sides of the table overlow a line.  The line for
    IEEE_SUPPORT_ROUNDING has a similar problem.  I think I once
    before suggested that the descriptions here were overly wordy
    for a table designed to handle single-line ones.  Compare to
    the one-line descriptions of the intrinsic inquiry functions,
    none of which seem to need words like "inquire whether".

  paper 03-138r1
    The constraint moved to [52:20+] parses ambiguously, but that
    problem is inherited from the text in the CD.  I'm just noticing
    it once again.  Sounds like it is talking about multiple derived
    types that have the same generic spec (not that that would make
    any sense, but that's what it sounds like).

    [53:21-22] I'm not sure I understand the reason given for this
    deletion.  I wonder whether this constraint perhaps was misscoped
    and intended to apply to specifics.

    [53:30+] I think the "may be" should be "is".  See comments on
    03-177

  paper 03-154r3
    [24:17] If this is worth saying at all, I'd think it would think
    would be appropriate to use actual citations of the standards
    instead of vaguely saying "the relevant standard".  We do have both
    as normative references.  I doubt that "the relevant standard"
    is an ISO-approved citation style.  For that matter, since there
    are two of them, I'd think that at least "standard" should be in
    the plural.  But I suppose perhaps you mean to imply that they are
    both specified in ISO 10646; that makes it a technical question,
    not an editorial one.  This edit also creates the first place
    where the usage of the term "this standard" is confusing (it could
    be naturally read as referring to the ISO 10646 standard mentioned
    in the previous clause of the same sentence).

    [40:13+] After this edit we have two consecutive sentences giving
    two different definitions of the term "ASCII collating sequence".
    Although the definitions are equivalent, I find this confusing
    rather than illuminating, particularly since the next sentence
    then proceeds to  use a third style of definition to describe the
    ISO 10646 collating sequence.

    Also, the addition of these sentences makes the referent of
    "these characters" in the following note confusing.  That
    formerly referenced the only characters mentioned in the para
    before the note.  It now is most naturally read as referring
    to ISO 10646 (the characters now mentioned in the last sentence
    before the note), which would be incorrect.

    [141:4+] I think the "the" before the first <variable> and the
    second <expr> should be omitted.  Usage of the article isn't even
    consistent within this sentence as is.  Our normal usage is to
    omit articles in contexts like this.

    [193:14]  Did you really mean to allow default character to be
    allowed for ISO 10646 internal files, but to disallow it for ASCII
    internal files?  That seems inconsistent (and sort of painful).

    Also, the vagueness of the word "contain" often bothers me, here
    included.  I'd have been happier to just talk about the input
    items and output items than about what the item-lists contain.
    We don't mean to prohibit these things from appearing as part of
    expressions in an item as long as the item itself ends up as
    an appropriate type.  If an item is f(some_string), does the
    item-list contain an item of the type of some_string?  Probably
    not because some_string isn't an "item", but I'd find this clearer
    without the word "contain" (since some_string is "contained" in
    an item).

    [224:14+] This seems like a strange place to put this material.
    Some of this seems like it applies to everything in the file - not
    just data edit descriptors.  (Blanks, delimitters, names).  I
    suppose this failing was also in the original, though.

    Also, I can't quite seem to find anywhere that says that
    characters are converted on I/O to Unicode files.  I see where it
    says that they have to be something that is representable, but I
    don't see anywhere that actually says that the conversion is done.
    Since conversion is *NOT* done for non-Unicode files, this seems
    like an important point that isn't just an "of course".

    [210:12+] The explanation of this edit made me think of issues
    elsewhere.  The explanation here says that we want to allow the
    default to be UTF-8, but we have contradictory requirements that
    would seem to disallow that.  For example, characters of
    random nondefault types are allowed in default character files,
    but disallowed in UTF-8 files.  Doesn't this effectively prohibit
    the default encoding from being UTF-8 on machines that have other
    nondefault character kinds?  If a system had only UTF-8 and,
    say, EBCDIC kinds, with UTF-8 being default character, I don't
    see how it can implement these inconsistent requirements.

    [343:13+] You got *EXACTLY* the text from the paper in this
    example.  I'm aware that's not what you wanted, but that's what
    you got.  Whether it is "really impossible" to generate the
    Japanese characters is not the applicable metric.  The editor
    doesn't know how to do it.  If someone (else) can generate
    images, as has been done in Note 4.14, we can try inserting
    them here.  Also, the editor does not know the appropriate
    character numbers and does not accept "go figure them out" as
    adequate editorial direction.  The current draft is certainly
    incorrect here now as a result.

  paper 03-155r1
    [301:27-28]  This edit has a construct "x and y and z", which
    doesn't parse clearly.  It is intended to be part of
    "... x and y) and (z ...", but it is hard to read.  For that
    matter, now that I look more closely, the second "and" should
    probably be "or" since only one or the other of these can
    apply - never both.  Also, a "then" after the initial "if"
    phrase would help another parsing difficulty.  (Generally,
    the more complicated a sentence, the more it helps to use a
    "then" to clearly delineate the end o fthe conditional part;
    a comma doesn't do it well enough in a complicated sentence).

    [324:15-16] Similar parsing problems.  I find both of the
    new sentences in this paper pretty hard to read.

  paper 03-157r1
    [268:7] and [405:36]  Seems to me that 15.2.1 ought to be a
    more appropriate section to xref.  My first reaction was to
    wonder why we were xreffing the section about named constants
    in the module...but indeed the defnition of "C character kind"
    does appear to be in 15.1.1.  IMO that's the wrong place for
    the definition of that term; it belongs in 15.2.1.

    [377:0+6] Duplicates an edit in some other paper (which I
    didn't bother to track down).

  paper 03-159r2
    The first edit expects the reader to be able to parse
    "x and y and z" as 2 conditions.  The intended parsing is
    that the 2 conditions are "x and y" and "x and z".  Good luck
    in deducing this without already knowing the answer.

  paper 03-162r2
    The "fixes" to 6.3.1.1 don't seem complete to me.  I think it
    would be better to separate the definition of what the
    allocated and unallocated states are from the list of how
    variables get to be that way.  The 2-item list at the beginning
    of 6.3.1.1 mixes all this together.  This added a few things
    to the list of how variables get to be that way, but the list
    isn't complete.  Better to remove it than to attempt completing
    it.  The "excuse" that we say something like "as in a DEALLOCATE
    statement" to describe the deallocation in some other situations
    strikes me as pretty flimsy.

    [110:24-25] I find the indirection in referring to "the allocation
    transfer procedure" odd.  For other single intrinsic procedures,
    we refer directly to the procedure by name.  The reader won't
    guess that you are doing this in case you add another one in the
    future - he reads the document as is.  Besides, if you do add
    another, you'll need to change this anyway (to be plural).

    [287:15] This edit is just flat wrong, but I didn't try to reword
    to fix it.  Someone needs to.  This explicitly labels MOVE_ALLOC
    as elemental (which it isn't and can't be).

    [13.5.14+1] The plural is wrong.

    Wouldn't it make sense to use the word "moves" instead of
    "transfers" in the 1-line descriptions of move_alloc?  It
    isn't called transfer_alloc.

    I don't understand the "remains" in "The allocation status of TO
    remains unallocated".  How does it "remain" unallocated if it
    wasn't unallocated in the first place (and I see no requirement
    for it to be).  If this is somehow implying that the INTENT(OUT)
    caused it to become unallocated (does that happen? I forget) and
    then that it "remains" unallocated after that, I find that *VERY*
    confusing.  Something should say this outright instead of leaving
    it to deduction.  If that's not what it is implying, then I
    suspect it may be wrong instead of confusing.  Also, I'd say that
    these 2 paras would better belong under the "TO" argument (and the
    last para under "FROM") instead of just hanging here outside of
    any subsubsection.

    [404:29+] I despise this use of the word "certain".  In this case,
    at least, it adds nothing.  The sentence would say exactly the
    same thing without it.

    Also, I don't think we ever talk about a target being associated
    with a pointer.  It is always the pointer that is associated with
    the target.  Even if you want to argue that the association goes
    both ways, I find this backwards version very confusing.  Since we
    never (that I can think of) describe it this way anywhere else, it
    makes me wonder whether you are trying to imply something other
    that what I assume you mean.

    Also, the indirect reference to move_alloc here looks especially
    silly insomuch as we then feel the need to follow it with a
    direct reference to explain the "certain" circumstances.  Might
    as well have just put the direct reference in the first place
    instead of making the reader trace through to find that both refs
    end up at the same place.

  paper 03-164r1
    This paper makes the discussion of TKR incompatibility in C.11.2
    awfully confusing, since there now is no such term.  I didn't
    bother to study C.11.2 to determine whether a simple change of the
    term would make it correct or not; that needs technical
    verification instead of editorial fixup (and frankly, I've never
    actually read C.11.2 at all, even to skim it; I used cut&paste to
    insert it without needing to type or read it).

    Also "distiguishable with" is horrid.  You undoubtedly want
    "distinguishable from".  I almost just did this for you, but
    you'll need to fix C.11.2 anyway, so I'll leave this one as
    passed also.

    After this paper, the acronym TKR appears only 3 times in the
    body of the document (and a bunch of times in Annex C - some of
    those presumably to disappear).  One of the 3 normative apearances
    is its definition in section 5.  It is then used 2 times, both in
    section 16.  One of those is in the definition of "distiguishable";
    another is a few lines further down (and possibly wrong??).  I
    don't think we should define such a cryptic TLA (Three-Letter
    Acronym) if this is all the use we have for it.  If we define it
    at all, we might want to do so within 300 pages or so of where
    it is used.

  paper 03-172r1
    The term "different means" in the [180:5] edit isn't defined and
    is subject to multiple interpretations.  Is a module procedure
    defined "by different means" than an external one, for example?

    The text added at [392:26+] says the same thing, but more
    precisely.  (Why we attempt to say exactly the same thing in
    normative text in 2 different places is a separate question).

  paper 03-173
    [265:9-10] In moving this, I had agreed that a note explaining
    this would be reasonable, but forgot to observe that there is no
    actual note text proposed.  The explanation for this is a
    technical, rather than editorial matter (I'm not at all sure I'd
    even get it right), so I didn't try to craft one on my own as
    editor.  Thus I did no edit for this, but I agree that it would be
    reasonable to do one (given suitable words).

  paper 03-180
    [272:13] The structure of this list has multiple confusions
    after this edit.  Two of the 2 list items have articles, but
    the other doesn't.  I can't quite tell whether "execution of"
    is supposed to apply to the first item or all 3, but neither
    option makes sense; I suspect it is somehow supposed to apply
    to the first 2, but the sentence structure doesn't support
    such an interpretation.

    And once that is all straightened out, it will still seem
    strange that the edit before this adds 2 items to the sentence
    starting this para, but only adds 1 to this one, making one
    wonder what happened to the other.  Is one of these 3 things
    still completed if the invocation didn't involve any of these
    3 kinds of things?  Seems to me that overall, these 2 edits
    have made the inconsistency and confusion worse instead of
    better.

  paper 03-183

    E19 - Not new to this paper, but it seems to me that this text
    (first para of 14.7) is about operations rather than operators.
    Two places.  Also, new to this paper, the first edit talks about
    "operators of" addition etc., while the second talks about
    "operators for" addition etc.  I think the usage should be
    consistent (and I think the appropriate usage is "operations of"
    in both cases).

    The last sentence of the edit has "x or y and z", which parses
    ambiguously at best.  (If you apply Fortran's rules of precedence
    to English, then the parsing is just wrong).

  paper 03-186

    [48:3-8] This edit deletes one thing that does not repeat
    anything said in 2.4.6.  I agree that the section on derived
    types was a strange place to discuss pointers in general
    (I've mentioned that more than once before), but we should
    make sure that all the material deleted from here actually
    *IS* said somewhere else.  The missing piece is the mention of
    the pointer association status of "undefined".  The word
    "undefined" doesn't even appear in 2.4.6; it probably should.
    The following sentence, deleted from [48-3-8] seems like a
    good candidate for transplanting into 2.4.6; it's an important
    thing to say somewhere (and preferably somewhere better than
    in a discussion of components).

      "Pointers have an association status of associated,
       disassociated, or undefined."

    (later).  Oh.  I see.  That same sentence (almost) appears in
    16.4.2.1.  Couldn't we tie 2.4.6 and 16.4.2 together a little
    better?  We can't seem to make up our mind which of these
    sections actually says what.  Section 2.4.6 has the definitions
    (they are bolded) of associated and disassociated, but doesn't
    have the above even more basic starting point.  The only xref
    from 2.4.6 to 16.4.2. is on a much smaller point and is later.
    These sections need to agree on which one is going to say
    what things; and they should xref each other more appropriately.

    Also, isn't the remaining normative content of 4.5.3.2 (a
    single short normative paragraph without a lot of meat) a bit
    slim for a subclause all of its own?  The paper describes
    (and with some justification) the normative material here as
    "introductory waffle".  Was it also noticed that the
    "introductory waffle" was the *ONLY* normative thing in the
    subclause?  Doesn't that seem a little odd?  We do have some
    subcauses that are composed entirely of examples, but those
    tend to have titles that include words like "examples"; they
    don't have titles like "Pointer components", which implies to
    me that this subclause is actually going to say something new
    about pointer components.

    While I'm on the subject, I might say similar things about
    4.5.3.1, though at least its para is a little longer.  Seems
    to me that if everything we need to say on a subject
    organizes well into a single short para, then the para itself
    is adequate organization, without needing a subclause
    heading.  I suspect these subclauses are developmental
    artifacts that might have once made sense, but no longer do.

  paper 03-188r1
    [262:28,263:1] Previously passed paper 03-138R1 moved and revised
    these words in such a way that the merge was not necessarily obvious.
    Therefore, I didn't do this edit.  It is possible that something
    still needs to be done here.  Also, this prompted me to reread the
    words as modified by 03-138R1 and question some aspects of them.
    I don't think a binding is "in" a type.  It might be in a type
    definition or it might be for a type, but I don't think it is in
    a type.  Also, this may relate to my comments on 03-113r3.

Miscellany not directly related to passed papers

  The note on pg 41 of the 03-007 had problems printing on many
  printers.  This needs to be resolved.  Possible fixes to the
  printing problem are under investigation.  If those don't work
  outm the nore wil need to be rewritten to use some other exampe.

  Section 9.10.4 typesets poorly (lines overly long and not readily
  breakable).  It could be improved by minor wording changes that I
  think an improvement anyway.  How about deleting "integer" from
  items 2-4.  It is superflous in that this is the only kind of value
  a scalar-int variable can ever be assigned.  We could also delete
  the "negative" from items 3-4, as that duplicates what is said in
  13.8.3.2, but I can see at least some clarifying value in the
  redundancy.

