
                                                              J3/03-261r1 
Date:    November 10, 2003
To:      J3
From:    Rich Bleikamp/jor
Subject: The left tab limit and child data transfer statements

Rob James asked:

  At [203:2-4] of the Fortran 2003 FCD, it says: 
  A record positioning edit descriptor, such as TL and TR, used on unit
  by a child data transfer statement shall not cause the record position
  to be positioned before the record position at the time the
  user-defined derived-type input/output procedure was invoked.
  
  It is unclear how the situation described could arise.  Given the
  definition of the left tab limit in 10.7.1.1, at the point that a
  child data transfer statement begins execution, the left tab limit
  would be set to the current file position.  And given the definitions
  of T, TL, and TR (also in 10.7.1.1), you can't go farther left than
  the left tab limit.
  
  It appears from the statement at [203:2-4] that the intent was that
  the left tab limit should not be set to the current file position when
  a child data transfer statement begins execution.

JOR responds: maybe, but after careful consideration, JOR now believes
a child data transfer statement should set the left tab limit to the
current position at both the START and the END of the execution of the
child data transfer statement.  The existing text says a child data transfer 
will reset the left tab limit at the start of the child data transfer.
Edits below add the resetting of the left tab limit when the child data
transfer completes.  Under these conditions, the restrictions at 203:2-4
are not needed, since the user cannot position too far left with T or TL.
This change gives maximal protection to the user from overwriting parts
of the record.

Edits to J3/03-007r2:

Delete [203:2-4]      it is not possible for the user to specify an
                      invalid TL value if the child data transfer
                      statement sets the left tab limit on startup

[236:2] add the following sentence to the end of that paragraph

  After a child data transfer completes, the left tab limit becomes
  defined as the character position of the current record
  or the current position of the stream file.

End of edits
