
                                           J3/04-118

Date:    10 Dec. 2003
To:      J3
From:    Dan Nagle
Subject: EXPLICIT Statement


During the public comments for f03, Jean Vezina requested
a way of requiring conversions between types be explicitly coded
via type intrinsics.  JoR has rejected the proposed
CONVERSION EXPLICIT statement, but if we turn this around to
EXPLICIT: CONVERSION, there are other items beyond conversions
which fit comfortably on the explicit list, to wit: INTERFACES,
CONNECTIONS, and possibly more.

Note that EXPLICIT: DECLARATION is already spelled IMPLICIT NONE.
I make no proposal to change that.

Number:

Title: EXPLICIT Statement

Submitted By: J3

Status: For Consideration

References:

Basic Functionality: An EXPLICIT statement would require explicit
                     declaration or action on the part of a program
                     of some effects which automaticly default
                     to a (possibly processor-dependent) value now.

Rationale:  Fortran has some defaults, some of which are processor-
            dependent, which may foil the task of writing correct programs.
            Some of these properties are silent conversion between types,
            preconnection of files with processor-dependent names, and
            the assumption of an implicit interface for an external
            name without an explicit interface, and possibly other
            "features" as well.

            The purpose of the EXPLICIT statement is to enable
            the programmer who desires to do so to defeat this behavior.
            The likely motivation is to write more clearly correct
            and better documented programs.  The use of EXPLICIT may be
            required by software firms as a coding standard.

Estimated Impact: Beyond one more statement to be supported, the effects
                  of an explicit statement depend on the items the standard
                  allows on the explicit-list.  All are detectable
                  by the processor, some may be more or less difficult
                  to enforce.

Detailed Specification: Add a new statement, the EXPLICIT statement.

                        EXPLICIT: <explicit-list>

                        <explicit-list-items> may include:

                        CONVERSION- requires, within a scoping unit,
                        use of type converting intrinsics when values
                        are assigned between variables of different types,
                        for example:

                        I = A
                        J = B
                        X = I/J

                        may produce a result other than the intended one.
                        Currently, this may be an undetected cockpit error.

                        CONNECTION- an EXPLICIT: CONNECTION in a main
                        program would instruct the support library
                        to disallow transfers to or from a unit not
                        explicitly opened.  This would eliminate
                        the "fort.42" droppings from appearing mysteriously
                        in working directories.  The units specified
                        by constants in ISO_FORTRAN_ENV should be
                        unaffected by this statement.

                        INTERFACE- requires, within a scoping unit,
                        an explicit interface for any external symbol
                        referenced.  Whether this should disallow
                        simple EXTERNAL statements is debatable.

                        Other items may be desirable, but this is all
                        I've considered.

                        Example (in a main program):

                        ! disallow most preconnected units in the program
                        ! require explicit interfaces in the main program
                        explicit: connection, interface

History:
