
                                                            J3/04-117

Date:    10 Dec. 2003
To:      J3
From:    Walt Brainerd
Subject: Proposed new features in Fortran

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Number:

Title: Clarify the "as if" rules.

Submitted by: J3

Status: For Consideration

References:

Basic Functionality: Clarify that most of what is described in the standard
is what the effect of executing a program must, not that
it must actually be executed as described.

For example, make it clear that statements do not really
have to be executed in the order written (except for
transfer of control) even though that's in effect what
it says.

Rationale: People ask about this often, in places like c.l.f.
It would save a lot of time to make it clear in the
standard, rather than having to answer the questions.

Estimated Impact:  None, on the technical content.

Detailed Specification: Make editorial changes to clarify this concept.

History: Submitted as Pub-101

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Number:

Title: Clarification of function side effects

Submitted by: J3

Status: For Consideration

References: Fortra 2003, Section 7.1.8.1

Basic Functionality: Clarify when a function (especially one with side effects)
must be executed. Perhaps a good example is the following.
Is the value printed for x predictable?

program side_effect ! This is a lot like NOTE 7.15.

   x = 2.0
   y = 0*f(x)
   print *, x, y

   contains

   function f(x)
   x = x + 1
   f = x
   end function f

end program side_effect

Rationale: The Fortran 77 interp on this subject was never used to
modify the standard in any way and members of J3 seem
to disagree on this issue, so that indicates to me that
it should be clarified.

Estimated Impact: It depends on the way we go.

If f doesn't have to be evaluated, and x is unpredictable,
the words in 7.1.8.1 need to be made stronger (clearer?).

If not, the sections needs a rewrite.

[Is my bias showing?]

Detailed Specification: Clarify the issue.

History: Submitted as Pub-102

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Number:

Title: OPT=-HUGE(0)

Submitted by: J3

Status: For Consideration

References:

Basic Functionality: Allow the programmer to indicate that no rearrangement
of expressions (or statements?) may take place. For example,
for L1(x) .or. L2(x), L1 must first be computed and,
regardless of the result L2 must be computed. In x+y+z,
x and y must be added first. In other words, the code must
be performed the same as the semantics indicate.

This might subsume the .andif. and volatile functions and
would really "mean what you code".

It is a big step which extends the idea of
"honor parentheses in expressons".

Rationale: The same as Pub-101 and Pub-102. There appears to be no
agreement on what can be done; this allows the programmer
to control things more closely.

Estimated Impact: It might make it easier to decide how to handle
the side effects issue.

There would be some small additional syntax and
its description, which might be a bit complicate,
but should be doable in one place, for the most part.

Detailed Specification: I don't have any suggestions for syntax, but perhaps
sections of code could be controlled by some syntax
that turns this on. Or it could be per procedure or
program unit.

History: Submitted as Pub-103

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Number:

Title: Clarify "approximation" for real values

Submitted by: J3

Status: For Consideration

References:

Basic Functionality: State in one place that the standard recognizes that
(essentially) all real and complex values and computations
involve approximations.

Rationale: In some places we say real computations are approximate
(e.g., SQRT). In other places we do not (e.g., +).

Probably nobody will think that + must be exact, but
why not state it clearly.

It will shorten the standard.

Estimated Impact: This is editorial only.

Detailed Specification: Put the words in the standard once.

Remove all/most of the occurrences of
"processor-dependent approximation".

History: Submitted as Pub-104

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Number:

Title: Add an ASSERT executable statement and 3 helper functions

Submitted by: J3

Status: For Consideration

References:

Basic Functionality: Add an executable statement of the form

ASSERT (alexp, [string],[level])

where alexp is either a simple-logical-expression or a
non-simple-logical-expression.

The value of alexp shall be TRUE

If string is absent it is as if it were present with
the value    who_am_i(some_argument)//"alexp".

If level is absent, it is if it were present with the
value 1

Execution of an assert statement has no effect.

Add 3 helper functions:

WHO_AM_I (logical-flag)
if logical-flag has one value (or is absent) the result is
a string with the name of the subprogram in it.  If logical-
flag has the other value, the result is "module:subprogram"

USUALLY(alexp)
The result of USUALLY is TRUE

RARELY(alexp)
The result of RARELY is TRUE

There are no restrictions on alexp for either function.

Rationale: It allows the user to explicitly state things that must
be true in a subprogram in a way that can be checked or
bypassed at execution time.  It allows the user to give
explicit hints to the optimizer in both a portable and
checkable way.

By splitting the alexp into simple and non-simple, where
simple for example has no .AND., etc. operators, only
simple inquiry functions, only simple integer operations,
etc, vendors would be strongly encouraged to parse the
simple expressions and use them in their optimization
decisions.  They could also parse the non-simple ones.
But, the intent is to make the simple ones a portable
way to say simple things about a routine so that almost
all optimizers will be pressured to do the right thing.
This, obviously, requires input from vendors.

The RARELY and USUALLY functions in an ASSERT would
be hints for optimization as opposed to flat out truths.
Thus, for example,
ASSERT (MOD(N,4) == 0)
    DO I = 1,N
would allow a processor to unroll the loop by 4 and NOT
generate checking code.  Whereas,
ASSERT(USUALLY(MOD(N,4)==0))
would tell a processor that unrolling by 4 is a darn
good idea, but that checking code is needed.

ASSERTs would most likely occur at the start or end
of a subprogram for "programming by contract" or
just before a DO loop as an optimization hint.

Estimated Impact: It only adds one more executable statement that follows
the normal rules of executable statements, it can be
a branch target, can't be mixed with the declaratives,
etc.

Execution of an ASSERT has no effect, hence it's
reletivily easy for a naive code generator to process.

A more reasonable implementation would be something like
IF (level < some_command_line_or_environment_value .and.
 .not. alexp)  STOP string
This allows the user to get run-time checking during
debugging and allows for fast execution once a program
is completely debugged.

Detailed Specification: see above.

If this idea really flies, we could think about allowing
simple asserts to be part of the declarations and hence
part of the interface information and hence take part
in generic resolution.  This sounds like a darn good idea
for a subsequent revision of the standard.

History: Submittied as Pub-105

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number:

Title: The ADDRESS attribute

Submitted by: J3

Status: For Consideration

References:

Basic Functionality: I propose that modifications be made to the Fortran standard to
allow passing buffers to C IO/communication routines without
explicitly using C_LOC. For this purpose, a new attribute, spelled
ADDRESS in this proposal, is provided. It would only be
compatible with a dummy argument of type TYPE(C_PTR). The C
address of the actual argument is passed by value by the caller.
The actual argument must be a valid argument for the C_LOC
intrinsic, in particular, have the TARGET attribute.
Here is an example:

INTERFACE
   SUBROUTINE MPI_Send(buffer, count), BIND(C,"MPI_Send")
      TYPE(C_PTR), ADDRESS :: buffer ! New attribute
      INTEGER(C_INT), VALUE :: count
   END SUBROUTINE
END INTERFACE

! Make this legal:
REAL(C_FLOAT), DIMENSION(...), TARGET :: buffer
CALL MPI_SEND(buffer,10) ! No need for C_LOC

The above problem is similar to the one with "pass-by-value".
Implementations used to deal with C interop with the %VAL
intrinsic, so that one had to wrap a %VAL around any argument in
a call that required pass-by-value. The present system in which
the VALUE attribute is present in the interface and there is no
difference at the call site is much better for the user and for code
clarity. I am essentially proposing that a similar solution be
implemented to the common problem of passing the address to an
IO-type routine.

Rationale: Many C libraries dealing with IO/communication, and in particular
MPI, have "typeless" dummy arguments (typically for buffers).
These are typically a void pointer in the C interface. Consider the
following (simplified) C prototype:

void MPI_Send(void * buffer, int count);

and its Fortran equivalent:

INTERFACE
   SUBROUTINE MPI_Send(buffer, count), BIND(C,"MPI_Send")
      TYPE(C_PTR), VALUE :: buffer
          INTEGER(C_INT), VALUE :: count
   END SUBROUTINE
END INTERFACE

The actual argument in C can be a pointer (C array) of any type,
and an implicit conversion into a void pointer happens:

float * buffer;
buffer=malloc(...);
MPI_Send(buffer,10); // Works in C

Fortran has a very different system in which the types of the
dummy and actual must match and no implicit conversion happens
at the call point. Therefore, one cannot call the MPI_Send
procedure with anything but a C pointer as an actual argument:

REAL(C_FLOAT), DIMENSION(:), TARGET :: buffer
CALL MPI_SEND(buffer,10) ! NOT OK in Fortran

but the following is OK:

CALL MPI_SEND(C_LOC(buffer),10)

The rationale for the proposed solution is two fold:
1) It allows for easier interfacing to numerous existing libraries,
including the existing Fortran interface to MPI (which is flawed as
described above), from the user perspective.
2) It will allow one to reuse current codes, which use vendor
extensions or simply non-conforming tricks to call MPI_SEND with
different types. This is friendly to existing practices.

Estimated Impact: This will have no cost for the implementations since many
implementations already have a switch that basically lets one
have type mismatches, and since the above change is really just a
syntactic wrapper for something everyone already knows how to
do: Just pass the memory address.

Incorporating this into the standard is not entirely trivial. The
proposed change will require that special provisions be made in
argument association in the case when the dummy is a C pointer
with the ADDRESS. Essentially what we would say is that it is as
if the user had put a C_LOC in the call:

! This:
CALL MPI_SEND(buffer,10)
! should be the same as:
CALL MPI_SEND(C_LOC(buffer),10)

Whether we relax the requirement that the actual be a TARGET
(since the actual of C_LOC needs to) is a different matter. I would
suggest that TARGET be required. If TARGET were optional,
there are issues to consider here such as contiguity requirements
and the provision for copy in/copy out (think Interp 125), as well as
the risk of allowing pointers to be taken by the C procedure and
abused, even in a legal program. I would like to say that, in some
cases, one wants to make sure no copy in/copy out happens (such
as asynchronous communication calls), and in Fortran using the
TARGET attribute is the *only* way to ensure this (Interp 125).


Detailed Specification: A dummy argument interoperable with a C pointer may have the
ADDRESS attribute. The VALUE attribute is implied by the
ADDRESS attribute, but may be duplicated.

If the dummy argument has the ADDRESS attribute, the actual
argument must be a valid actual argument for C_LOC. The value
of the result of C_LOC applied to the actual argument, i.e., the C
adress of the actual argument, is associated with the dummy.

History: Submittied as Pub-106

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
