
                                           J3/04-136

Date:    16 Dec. 2003
To:      J3
From:    Dan Nagle
Subject: Better Description of Memory- Same Assumed Shape


Processor speeds have increased to very much faster rates
than memory speeds, compilers have improved to the point
where most code sequences are nearly perfectly optimized.
Separate compilation confounds "application compilers",
pointers and targets complicate aliasing analysis.
Therefore, more information regarding aliasing is essential
for very high computational rates.  The "Better Description
of Memory" features attempt to define features which may
provide this missing information to compilers.  Since several
features combine to do so, they are broken into individual
papers for consideration.

Title: Better Description of Memory- Same Assumed Shape

Submitted By: J3

Status: For Consideration

References:

Basic Functionality: Allow declarations of assumed shape dummy arguments
                     all having the same shape.

Rationale:  Situations exists where Fortran's current assumed size argument
            passing could result in better code if compilers could assume
            that some arrays had the same extents.  This proposal suggests
            a way to do so.  In some situations (internal procedures),
            the compiler may know that all shapes are the same, in others
            (external procedures or module procedures), worst case assumptions
            may need to be made.

Estimated Impact:  Compilers must recognize a new keywork, and apply
                   the information to code generation.

Detailed Specification: SAME_SHAPE_AS()

                        Consider:

                        subroutine muck_em( A, B, C)
                        real, intent( in), dimension(:) :: A
                        real, intent( inout), dimension(:) :: B
                        real, intent( out), dimension(:) :: C
                        B = A * B
                        C = -A + B
                        return
                        end subroutine muck_em

                        If the compiler can assume that A, B, C
                        all have the same shape, size checking code may be
                        eliminated and other improvements may be possible.
                        For example, loop jamming may be easier.

                        Note that differing intents prevent A, B, C
                        from being declared on the same declaration,
                        as would differing types or other attributes.
                        A separate dimension statement has the same problem.

                        real, intent( in), dimension(:) :: A
                        real, intent( inout), same_shape_as( A) :: B
                        real, intent( out), same_shape_as( A) :: C

                        allows the compiler to assume that all arrays
                        have the same shape.

History:
