
                                           J3/04-138

Date:    17 Dec. 2003
To:      J3
From:    Dan Nagle
Subject: Control Leading Zeros


Some numeric applications produce very large amounts
of formatted output, which must be automatically compared
to a reference file for benchmarking or verification purposes.
The processor-dependent leading zero of D, E, F format descriptors
may greatly complicate this automatic comparison.

Following the example of the S, SP, SS descriptors to control
the optional leading plus sign, I propose LZ, LZP, LZS descriptors
to provide control of the optional leading zero.
(Note the difficulty of using either L or Z alone.)

Number:

Title: Control of Leading Zeros

Submitted By: J3

Status: For Consideration

References: F 10.6.1.2.1, E D 10.6.1.2.2, SS SP S 10.7.4

Basic Functionality: Define LZ, LZP, LZS edit descriptors ot provide
                     programmer control over the optional leading zero
                     printed by real format descriptors (analogously
                     to the S, SP, SS control of optional plus signs).

Rationale:  Large output datasets may require automatic comparison,
            perhaps using the Unix 'diff' program or similar.  This
            comparison can be made more difficult by optional characters,
            such as a leading zero in F, D, E formats.  Allowing
            precise control allows character-for-character formatted
            output to be made.

Estimated Impact: Processors will have to support one more control
                  edit descriptor.  Since some processors choose
                  to print or not the optional leading zero, either
                  choice is not too difficult.

Detailed Specification: Add LZ, LZP, LZS control edit descriptors,
                        as follows:

                        LZP- print a leading zero with following F, D, E
                        edit descriptors;

                        LZS- suppress the leading zero with following F, D, E
                        edit descriptors;

                        LZ- the leading is optional (processor default).

                        Example:

                        FMT='( LZP, F8.4, E16.8, D20.10) print leading zeros'

History:
