
                                           J3/04-116

Date:    09 Dec. 2003
To:      J3
From:    Dan Nagle
Subject: IS_PRINTABLE


Processors may prohibit some characters from appearing
in formatted records or formatted streams.  How is the user
to know which characters?

Number:

Title: IS_PRINTABLE

Submitted By: J3

Status: For Consideration

References: Section 9.1.1 & 9.2.2.3(7)

Basic Functionality: IS_PRINTABLE returns true if its character
                     argument may be written to a formatted record
                     or stream.

Rationale:  Processors may prohibit some control characters
            from appearing in formatted records or streams,
            but which characters?  Surely, we want a program
            to be able to detect this processor-dependent set
            of prohibited characters, and take whatever remedial
            action (substitute ^char, etc.) it deems appropriate.

            The processor-dependency argues for inclusion
            in ISO_FORTRAN_ENV.

Estimated Impact: Support libraries know which characters they won't accept.
                  They may simple return true if the character argument
                  may be printed, and false otherwise.

                  Note that, with the possibility of multiple character
                  sets, this is no longer an issue of "below blank
                  won't print", it's more complex.  Also, different
                  processors may have different ideas of which
                  characters will interfere with the O/S record
                  conventions.  Perhaps there ought to be some scheme
                  for distinguishing formatted records from formatted
                  streams, but that seems minor enough to be treated
                  when edits are proposed.

Detailed Specification: Add a new intrinsic to ISO_FORTRAN_ENV:
                        IS_PRINTABLE ( char )
                        Argument is any kind of character*1.
                        Return is true if the character may be written
                        to a formatted record or stream,
                        and false otherwise.

                        Another possibility is to allow multicharacter
                        strings, and return 0 for "all OK"
                        and an index to the first troublesome character
                        if one is encountered.

History:
