
                                           J3/04-137

Date:    17 Dec. 2003
To:      J3
From:    Dan Nagle
Subject: Documenting Compiler Versions


One compiler (CVF) used to have a batch DOS file to be executed
to generate a set of information to be copied-and-pasted
into a bug report.  It would be handy if similar information
were available in a standard way.

Not only bug reports, but benchmarks and verification tests
all benefit from knowing exactly which compiler was used.
Standardizing access to this information makes Fortran
a more attractive choice for applications needing verification.

Note that the Windows standard for applications requires,
apparently, that "About ..." windows in IDE's not allow
copy-and-paste and be modal so a text file window cannot
have focus while the About message is displayed.
(29-digit license numbers are frosting on the cake only.)

Number:

Title: Document Processor Version

Submitted By: J3

Status: For Consideration

References:

Basic Functionality: Add to iso_fortran_env a processor defined
                     character variable, scalar or rank-1,
                     of processor-defined length, containing
                     processor specified version information.

Rationale:  Many times, after a suspected compiler bug has been detected,
            the next step is to check a bug database.  This lookup
            needs the compiler's version information to succeed.  Today,
            this comes from a "-V" or "-version" command line option,
            or some other processor dependent means.  If the bug
            is an application error, knowing the compiler version
            which first detected it is helpful.

            Benchmarks and verifications also must document the exact
            processor used to compile the application.

Estimated Impact: Processors would have to make their version strings
                  available via a name in iso_fortran_env.
                  Vendors might actually benefit from more detailed
                  bug reports.

Detailed Specification: Add to iso_fortran_env a default character variable
                        or rank-1 array named processor_version.
                        This will contain the processor-dependent
                        version information.

                        If defined by standard Fortran, it's declaration
                        might appear similar to:

                        character( len= *), parameter :: processor_version = &
                           'Ajax Fortran 2003 Version 0.99 (beta)'

                        or, perhaps:

                        character( len= 72), dimension( 3), parameter :: &
                           processor_version = [ 'Acme Fortran 2003 v 8.2a', &
                              'Acme SuperLinker v 5.6c', &
                              'Acme RTL v 3.4e' ]

                        In any case, a programmer could add:

                        write(*,*) trim( processor_version)

                        to an application to document the processor in use
                        in the application's output file.

History:
