
                                                         J3/04-240

Date:    11 Feb 2004
To:      J3
From:    Richard Maine
Subject: Simplified KIND selection

This is a proposal for the next standard after Fortran 2003.

(I thought I recalled a requested format for such proposals,
but my recollection doesn't seem to be good enough to find
it at the moment.  I can reformat this if needed.)

A recurring theme in user complaints is the complexity of
the means of portably specifying kind values.  The
selected_real_kind intrinsic is not a good match to
typical application requirements.  It can be contorted to
work, but the contortions make it obscure and nonintuitive.

Rarely is it useful to specify precision requirements in
decimal digits, particularly as Fortran processors don't
tend to use decimal-based representations.  Furthermore,
when requirements are expressed in decimal digits, they
are typically requirements on the end results, which aren't
the same thing as the requirements on the variables used in
the internal computations.

If you do go to the trouble of calculating the requirements on
internal variables, you are going to get impractically many
different precision requirements for different variables.  To
avoid a mess of complicated generics, in practice this always
needs to be simplified down to a working precision that is
adequate for most of the code, with a few possible expections
where higher precision is needed.

In actual practice with existing processors, the real choice is
just whether to use 32-bit, 64-bit, or 128-bit reals and that is
how most programers tend to think of it.  It takes a fair amount
of thought to turn a requirement for 64-bit reals into something
like selected_real_kind(12,30), which is what I use.  The
intention to select a 64-bit real is not at all obvious from
looking at this.  Other users probably use slightly different
values, which will cause problems if code ever is used on
processors that have precisions near the boundaries of what
the users specify.  Code intended to use the same precisions
could then end up using different ones.

We should certainly keep the current capability of
selected_real_kind, both for compatibility with existing code and
for those situations, rare though they are, where it might happen
to reasonably fit an application.

However, I think we should also provide a simpler, more direct
way to specify what the users almost always need.  In a way, this
is just syntactic sugar, but it is syntactic sugar that is useful
for a very large fraction of the users.  The current form requires
enough explanation that many users just don't use it, writing
nonportable code instead.

For now, I want to concentrate on the requirement.  There are
multiple ways to meet this requirement.  We need to first agree
that simpler kind specification is a requirement.  Note that
I am not proposing that we change anything about how kinds
work; I just think we need an alternative to selected_real_kind
for selecting them portably.

We should presumably do something comparable for integer kinds,
just for consistency, though the need is smaller there (and
a partial solution has been brought in through the back door
or C interop; see below).

The following are several posssible approaches to meeting the
requirement.  I do not propose a straw vote on that level of
detail yet.  These are listed just as ideas for thought.

1. We could break down and specify kind numbers for some common
   cases, perhaps the IEEE kinds, or perhaps more generally for
   32-, 64-, and 128-bit real kinds.  I don't necessarily
   advocate this, but it would certainly address the requirement.

2. We could specify some standard parameter names for common
   cases, possibly in the ISO_FORTRAN_ENV module and/or one
   of the IEEE modules.

   Interestingly, we have already done something like this for
   integers, using the C interop back door.  I predict that
   some Fortran users will use, for example, C_INT16_T for
   reasons having nothing to do with C interoperability, but just
   because it is a simpler and more intuitive way to specify
   the kind for a 16-bit integer than selected_int_kind(4),
   which is what I now use.  There isn't a similar C_REAL64_T.

   This also largely matches current recommended practice of
   defining parameter names in a module.  By standardizing it,
   we would facilitate reuse and interoperability of codes
   which now likely each define their own versions.

   Standardization would also facilitate development of portable
   habits in new programers who don't need the distraction of
   writing a module using current selected_real_kind for their
   first few programs.

3. We could enhance selected_real kind (or add a separate
   intrinsic) so that users could specify requirements in the
   desired terms instead of having to translate into decimal
   digits.  In particular, allow specification of the storage
   size in bits so that a user can ask for a 64-bit real
   instead of translating this requirement into 12 decimal
   digits of precision.

   I also once thought about asking for a way to specify
   precision in bits (or some other base if you want to be
   general, but binary is the most important one).  That would go
   part way and could optionally be adopted as part of a solution.
   But users most commonly express their requirements in terms
   of the storage size instead of the mantisa size, so I think
   that we should address storage size somehow.
