
                                                   J3/04-237
                          
Date:    Feb 11, 2004
To:      J3
From:    Dan Nagle
Subject: Assumed Kind


Support for generic programming is an important feature
of modern programming languages; Fortran's support is,
at present, very limited.  Some proposals for generic programming
propose to restrict a generic procedure to "universal operations",
by which is meant: assignment, pointer assignment, array element
selection, and other operations which may be applied to any type.
The grave disadvantage of this limitation is obvious.  For example,
a special function (Bessel, zeta, erf(), erfc() etc) cannot
be coded for any kind of real (or complex) using this approach.

An alternative I call Assumed Kind is proposed here.
The type, but not the kind, of the procedure is coded.
In addition to allowing operations, this has the advantage
of allowing the compiler to check for errors when the procedure
is first encountered, an advantage especially for very large
programs.

I am not proposing that assumed kind be the only genericity
considered for f03++, I do propose that assumed kind is complementary
to some other approaches, and ought to be on the menu during
the discussion of features for f03++ genericity.

Number: 

Title: Assumed Kind

Submitted By: J3

Status: For Consideration

References: 

Basic Functionality: The result kind of a function, or
                     the result kind of an intent( out) procedure argument,
                     may be defined to be the same kind
                     as an intent( in) or intent( inout) actual argument.
                     The actual argument kind is not known until
                     the procedure reference is found.  That is,
                     the kind of the function result is found
                     by the kind of an actual argument.

Rationale:  When writing a module containing, say, special functions,
            one often must write the code for the function for each kind
            of, say type real, supported.  This leads to two difficulties:
            First, that the "same" code is repeated for different kinds,
            and second, that the module must have different versions
            for different processors in order to support all kinds
            supported by each processor.  Conditional compilation
            is a second rate solution.

Estimated Impact: The compiler must check the procedure with an assumed kind
                  argument, and compile it when the kind is known.
                  Compilers do no such thing at present.  However,
                  the types of all arguments are known when the procedure
                  is first encountered, so erroneous code may be flaged
                  immediately.

Detailed Specification: Example:

                        real( kind= kind( x)) function bessel( x, n)
                        real( kind= *), intent( in) :: x
                        integer, intent( in) :: n

                        ...

                        ! initialize computation

                        bessel = 0.0_kind( x)

                        ! compute bessel

                        ...

                        bessel = <something>
                        return
                        end function bessel

                        If bessel is called with kind( x) == single,
                        a single precision bessel is compiled.  If bessel
                        is called with kind( x) == double, a double bessel
                        is compiled.  All kinds supported by any processor
                        are available, no compilation failure occurs
                        due to a kind not supported being present.  And yet
                        there is only one version of the function to support.

                        The alternative is to force the programmer to code
                        the function once for each kind supported
                        by each processor where this code is needed,
                        and then change the module so that only all kinds
                        supported by each processor are present.

History: 
