
                                                       J3/04-249

To:         J3
From:       Craig Dedo
Date:       February 16, 2004
Subject:    Variable Format Expressions

Number:

Title:                Variable Format Expressions

Submitted By:    Craig Dedo

Status:            For Consideration

References:


Basic Functionality:
    A variable format expression (VFE) allows a programmer to use an
arithmetic expression at any place in a format edit descriptor where an
integer can be used.

Rationale:
    The current Fortran 95 standard and the Fortran 2003 FCD only allow
format edit descriptors which are either character expressions or hard
coded into the source code.

    A VFE provides the application programmer a convenient and
straightforward method of varying the format edit descriptor at run
time, as conditions require.  Many application programmers consider VFEs
to be easier to use and less error prone than the only current
alternative of building format specifications in character expressions.
Thus, VFEs offer the application developer an opportunity to save on
programming time and effort, with a consequent increase in productivity.

    It is the intent of this proposal to ratify existing practice.  A
survey of existing compilers  indicates that most implementations which
offer this feature do so in a similar, if not identical, manner.

Estimated Impact:
    There would be no impact on existing codes.  There should be little
or no conflict with the existing extension, since the extension has
nearly identical technical specification in existing implementations.
The existing technical specification is well known and well understood,
so there should be little, if any, ambiguity.  Preliminary work I did on
this feature in 1996 and 1997 indicates that a complete specification in
the standard would be around half a page of text.  There should be no
interaction with other features.

Detailed Specification:
    A variable format expression is a scalar numeric expression enclosed
inside angle brackets, <>.  A VFE can be used in a format edit
descriptor any place that an integer can.  During program execution, the
VFE is re-evaluated each time it is encountered in the normal format scan.

    If the VFE is not of integer data type, it is converted to integer
type before it is used, according to the usual rules for data type
conversion.  A VFE may be of any KIND type that is defined on the processor.

    The VFE can be any valid scalar numeric expression.  It can include
dummy arguments, function references, and named constants.  It shall not
include any array valued data item or any variable with the POINTER
attribute.  Any function referenced in a VFE shall not execute any I/O
operation.

    The value of a VFE must obey the restrictions on magnitude applying
to its use in the format, or an error occurs.

    VFEs shall not be used in a character format specification (10.1.2).

    VFEs are evaluated each time they are encountered in the scan of the
format.  If the value of the variable used in the expression changes
during the execution of the I/O statement, the new value is used the
next time the format item containing the expression is processed.

Example
Consider the following statements:
        INTEGER    ::    IWIDTH, IDIGITS, IEXPONENT, NF, NE
        REAL, ALLOCATABLE        ::    FREAL (:), EREAL(:)
!        Intervening statements defining the values of NF and NE
        ALLOCATE    FREAL (NF)
        ALLOCATE    EREAL (NE)
!        Intervening statements defining the elements of FREAL, EREAL,
IWIDTH, IDIGITS,
!            and IEXPONENT.
        WRITE (*, 601)  FREAL, EREAL
601    FORMAT (5X, <NF>F<IWIDTH>.<IDIGITS>, &
        & 5X, <NE>E<IWIDTH+6>.<IDIGITS>E<IEXPONENT>)

    If, on one execution of the WRITE statement, NF is 5, NE is 3,
IWIDTH is 12, IDIGITS is 7, and IEXPONENT is 2, then statement 601 would
be equivalent to:
601    FORMAT (5X, 5F12.7, 5X, 3E18.7E2)

    If, on a subsequent execution of the WRITE statement, NF is 6, NE is
2, IWIDTH is 10, IDIGITS is 5, and IEXPONENT is 3, then statement 601
would be equivalent to:
601    FORMAT (5X, 6F10.5, 5X, 2E16.5E3)

History:
