
                                                        J3/04-248

To:      J3
From:    Craig Dedo
Date:    February 16, 2004
Subject: Alignment Directives

Number:           

Title:                Alignment Directives

Submitted By:    Craig Dedo

Status:            For Consideration

References:

Basic Functionality:
    There should be one or more alignment directives that would allow 
users to control the storage alignment of sequence structure components, 
array elements, and COMMON block members.

Rationale:
    Currently, the Fortran standard does not allow the user to specify 
the storage alignment of COMMON block members, array elements, or 
sequence structure components.  It would be useful to enable the 
programmer to be able to specify the storage alignment.  This is 
especially true in cases of access to data structures defined in other 
languages.  In most cases, such data structures have very precise 
ordering and alignment requirements.  These alignment requirements may 
not match the default alignment rules used by the Fortran processor.

Estimated Impact:
    There is no impact on existing codes.  It should be relatively easy 
for vendors to implement this feature since implementors have to do 
storage space calculations anyway.  It should not be difficult to write 
the specification in the standard.

Detailed Specification:
    We would need to develop a new keyword with a scalar numeric 
expression as the value.  An example of possible syntax is:
    ALIGN scalar-numeric-expr

    The scalar-numeric-expr could be of any numeric data type and kind 
parameter.  It would need to be either a constant.  If different from 
integer, it would be converted to integer using the usual rules of 
numeric conversion.  If the magnitude of the result after conversion is 
too large for the largest kind of integer or is less than 1, an error 
occurs.  If there is no alignment directive in effect, the default value 
would be processor dependent.

    Evaluation of the alignment directive would result in subsequent 
COMMON block members, array elements, and structure members being 
aligned at a memory storage location that is an integer multiple of the 
specified alignment value beyond the starting location. 

    The alignment directive would be modal.  I.e., it would remain in 
effect until the processor encounters a different alignment directive or 
until the end of the scoping unit of the COMMON block, array, or 
structure, whichever occurs first.  Alignment directives of inner 
structure definitions would take priority over alignment directives of 
outer structure definitions, but would extend only to the end of the 
inner structure definition.     

    Arrays could have only one alignment directive, which must be a 
property of the array.  COMMON blocks and structures could have any 
number of alignment directives. 

    It would be necessary to define the concept of memory storage unit 
independent of any other storage unit concept such as file storage unit, 
character storage unit, and numeric storage unit.  It would be strongly 
recommended but not required for the memory storage unit to be an 8 bit 
octet, where such a definition is practical.

History:
