
                                           J3/04-328
                          
To: J3
From: Dan Nagle
Subject: Obtain a logical unit for opening
Date: 2004 June 3

Logical Unit numbers are processor dependent, there is no
guaranteed way to obtain one.  Rules of thumb, such as "use
a number greater than ten and less than a hundred" are
only somewhat portable.  Large programs developed
by several programmers may benefit from a standard systematic
way of obtaining unit numbers.

This proposal is for an intrinsic module procedure to return
a logical unit number which may be opened.  Following suggestions
made by Walt the name is changed and wording suggested by Van
is used to improve the wording and change slightly the semantics.

Number: 

Title: GET_IO_UNIT

Submitted By: J3

Status: For Consideration

References: 

Basic Functionality: Add an procedure to ISO_FORTRAN_ENV
                     to return a logical unit number which may be opened.

Rationale:  Logical unit numbers are processor-dependent, some
            method of getting one should be supported.

            Some programs (for example, multithreaded programs)
            may want units to be distributed according to a rule
            (for example, 1000 times thread number plus offset).
            Thus, some flexibility should be part of this intrinsic.

Estimated Impact: The impact was estimated by J3/JoR at 167 as Trivial.

Detailed Specification: Edits: See paper 04-327 regards possible renumbering
                        of 13.8.2.  These edits assume that paper passes.

                        [360:33++] Add:
                        "13.8.2.2.x GET_IO_UNIT( UNIT, [ NOTUNIT, MINUNIT,
                                          MAXUNIT, IOSTAT, IOMSG ] )

                        *Description.* Return <file-unit-number> values
                        that exist, are not connected to an external file,
                        and can be connected to an external file.

                        *Class.* Subroutine.

                        *Arguments.*

                        UNIT shall be of type integer and may be of
                             any rank.  It is an INTENT(OUT) argument.  It is
                             assigned <file-unit-number> values of logical
                             units that exist, are not connected to an
                             external file, and can be connected to an
                             external file.  It shall not be assigned a value
                             equal to INPUT_UNIT, OUTPUT_UNIT or ERROR_UNIT. 
                             If it is scalar, one <file-unit-number> value is
                             returned; if it is an array, SIZE(UNIT) unique
                             <file-unit-number> values are returned.

                        NOTUNIT    shall be of type integer.  It shall
                        (optional) be a scalar or a rank 1 array.  It is
                                   an INTENT(IN) argument.  The value of UNIT,
                                   or an element of UNIT if it is an array,
                                   shall not be equal to the value of NOTUNIT,
                                   or any element of NOTUNIT if it is an array.

                        MINUNIT    shall be a scalar of type integer.
                        (optional) It is an INTENT(IN) argument.  The value
                                   of UNIT, or an element of UNIT if it is
                                   an array, shall not be less than the value
                                   of MINUNIT.

                        MAXUNIT    shall be a scalar of type integer.
                        (optional) It is an INTENT(IN) argument.  The value
                                   of UNIT, or an element of UNIT if it is
                                   an array, shall not be greater than the
                                   value of MAXUNIT.

                        IOSTAT     shall be a scalar of type default integer.
                        (optional) It is an INTENT(OUT) argument.  It is
                                   assigned the value zero if the variable
                                   associated with UNIT contains valid
                                   <file-unit-number> values and assigned a
                                   processor-dependent positive value otherwise.

                        IOMSG      shall be a scalar of type default character.
                        (optional) It is an INTENT(INOUT)  argument. It is
                                   assigned a processor-dependent error message
                                   if the value of the variable associated with
                                   the IOSTAT argument indicates an error
                                   occurred.  Otherwise, its value is unchanged.

History: Submitted as 04-107 and 04-186 at 167
