
                                                         J3/04-346

To: J3
From: Dan Nagle
Subject: Logical & Character Kinds
Date: 2004 June 24

There is no way to determine all the elements of a processor's set
of logical kinds; there is no way to determine all the elements
of a processor's set of character kinds.  Furthermore,
extensive discussion over years has yeilded no satisfactory
design for a selected_log_kind function.  The current
selected_char_kind function requires a name as input.  The space
of all possible names is too large to permit a reasonable search.

This paper proposes a way to give a program access
to all available logical kind values and character kind names.

Number:

Title: Find all available logical and character kinds

Submitted By: J3

Status: For Consideration

References:

Basic Functionality: Add constants to iso_fortran_env which specify
                     all available logical kind values and
                     all available character kind names.

Rationale:  A program (subject or not to preprocessing) or
            an automatic code generator may have a preferred kind
            or a preferred ranking of possibly available kinds
            for entities of logical and character type.  Currently,
            the only means available is to RTFM and manually add
            the specific values needed.

            For example, a very large frequently used but infrequently
            updated logical array may be best expressed as an array
            of byte (the smallest kind) logical.  Default logical may exhaust
            the processor's fastest cache, leaving no space for numerical
            data.  Is byte logical availanle?  And, in any case,
            what is the smallest logical kind available?
            There is no automatically available answer now.

Estimated Impact: The impact was estimated by JoR at 167 to be trivial.
                  Only iso_fortran_env is affected.

Detailed Specification: These edits assume paper 127, which reorganizes
                        13.8.2, passes.

                        Edits:

                        [360:3+] Add

                        "13.8.2.1- CHARACTER_KINDS

                        The values of the default character rank 1 array
                        CHARACTER_KINDS are the names, when any trailing
                        blanks are removed, which may be passed
                        to the SELECTED_CHAR_KIND procedure to obtain
                        a valid kind value, except that the name 'DEFAULT'
                        shall not appear.

                        The lower bound of CHARACTER_KINDS is one; the size
                        of CHARACTER_KINDS is the number of character names
                        supported by the processor.  The names are stored
                        in non-decreasing order of storage size of objects
                        of the corresponding kind."

                        [360:26+] Add

                        "13.8.2.6+ LOGICAL_KINDS

                        The values of the default integer rank 1 array
                        LOGICAL_KINDS are the kind values of all available
                        logical kinds.

                        The lower bound of LOGICAL_KINDS is one; the size
                        of LOGICAL_KINDS is the number of logical kinds
                        supported by the processor.  The values are stored
                        in non-decreasing order of storage size of objects
                        of the corresponding kind."

History: Originally proposed at 167 in paper 121.
