
                                                            J3/04-348r1

To:      J3
From:    Malcolm Cohen
Subject: Construct Name Local to Construct
Date:    2004 August 12

One item of unfinished business from f03 is the issue of making construct
names be local to the construct.  This will allow, for example, a construct
name to be repeated within a scoping unit.

Number: 

Title: Construct Name Local to Construct

Submitted By: J3

Status: For Consideration

References: 

Basic Functionality: Make a construct name be local to its construct.

Rationale:
  Construct names are only referenced from within the construct.  Therefore,
it makes sense to use a construct scope for the name.  Further, within a
local scope, a construct name might naturally be desirable more than once.
For example, within a local scope, an if-block might naturally be named
"check_iostat" following more than one statement containing an iostat
specifier, or more than one do-construct might be naturally named
"all_rows", "all_columns", or "all_planes", etc.

  Of course, for cycle and exit to work properly, nested constructs must all
have names unique within the nest.

Estimated Impact: 3 or 4.

Detailed Specification:
(1) Define a construct name to have construct scope.
(2) Remove construct names from all local entity classes, so that it can be the
    same as any local name and any global name.
(3) Nested constructs shall not have the same name.  (Note: after removal from
    local entities, this needs to be explicitly stated in the standard.)

Incomplete Illustrative Edits:

[406:4-5] remove "named constructs,"

[409:29+] add new paragraph
  "The name of a named construct has a scope of that construct.  It may be
   the same as any local identifier or global identifier.  The
   <construct-name> of a contained named construct shall not be the same as
   a <construct-name> of any of its containing named constructs."

History: Submitted as 04-108 and 04-158 at 167.
