
                                                      J3/04-330

Date:    18 May 2004
To:      J3
From:    Rob James
Subject: Argument association and the TARGET attribute

NUMBER:
TITLE: Argument association and the TARGET attribute
KEYWORDS: argument, association, target, pointer
DEFECT TYPE:
STATUS: J3 consideration in progress

QUESTION:
Fortran 95 allowed the following program to print "T".
Fortran 2003 does not appear to allow this.

      module m
        integer, pointer :: i_ptr
      contains
        subroutine sub(j)
          integer j
          call sub2(j)
        end subroutine
        subroutine sub2(j2)
          integer, target :: j2
          print *, associated (i_ptr, j2)
        end subroutine
      end module

      program foo
        use m
        integer, target :: i
        i_ptr => i
        call sub(i)
      end program

Fortran 95 stated, in section 12.4.1.1, on page 200:
  If the dummy argument does not have the TARGET or POINTER
  attribute, any pointers associated with the actual argument do
  not become associated with the corresponding dummy argument on
  invocation of the procedure.  If such a dummy argument is
  associated with a dummy argument with the TARGET attribute,
  whether any pointers associated with the original actual
  argument become associated with the dummy argument with the
  TARGET attribute is processor dependent.

Fortran 2003 (04-007) states, in section 12.4.1.2, on page 269:
  If the dummy argument does not have the TARGET or POINTER
  attribute, any pointers associated with the actual argument do
  not become associated with the corresponding dummy argument on
  invocation of the procedure. If such a dummy argument is
  associated with an actual argument that is a dummy argument
  with the TARGET attribute, whether any pointers associated
  with the original actual argument become associated with the
  dummy argument with the TARGET attribute is processor
  dependent.

It's clear in this example that j is not associated with i_ptr,
because it doesn't have the TARGET attribute.  The dummy argument
j2 with the TARGET attribute falls into the case described by the
second sentence quoted from Fortran 95.  It does not fall into the
case described by the second sentence quoted from Fortran 2003,
since j is not associated with an actual argument that is a dummy
argument with the TARGET attribute.  It appears that the second
sentence in Fortran 2003 gets things backwards.

Was it intended in the example above that the program should be
allowed to print "T"?

ANSWER:
Yes.  An edit is supplied to correct this error.

EDITS:
This edit refers to paper 04-007.
[270:1-2] Change "associated with an actual argument that is" to
          "used as an actual argument that is associated with".

SUBMITTED BY: Rob James

HISTORY: 04-???   m169 Submitted
