
                                                                        J3/04-372

Date:         12 August 2004
To:            J3
From:         Michael Ingrassia
Subject:     Response to 04-371.

1.  I quibble with the goal.  The case has not been made that pointers, allocatables,
	and assumed-shape arrays should be interoperable with C. 
	Even if it is desirable to introduce interoperability, 
	it is not necessarily a good idea to promote a private implementation
	detail (dope vectors) to public API status.  

	A better approach:  The abstraction could
	remain private if C were to introduce its own versions of
	Fortran-style pointers, allocatables, and assumed-shape arrays
	(maybe C99 comes closer than C90 to achieving equivalents for some
	of these? )  Fortran compilers could then share a common allocation
	table with their companion processor and be sure that the special
	semantics (e.g. prohibition against deallocating only part of a previously
	allocated object) are respected.  But, obviously, defining and 
	making a big change to the C language would probably take years.

Questions:
1) What is the significance of "@param" 

Challenges:

1) The API should be versioned in some way.  The names chosen
	FDesc_Alloc_Create
	FDesc_Alloc_Reset
	FDesc_Alloc_Destroy etc.
   describe functionality that is strongly synchronized with the content of
   dope vectors  adequate to implement Fortran 2003, but the case has not 
   been made to freeze the content of dope vectors.  I suggest consideration of
	F2003_Alloc_Create
	F2003_Alloc_Reset
	F2003_Alloc_Destroy   etc.

2)   What exactly is the "Alloc" in FDesc_Alloc_Create ?
       The parallelism in 
	FDesc_Alloc_Create, 
	FDesc_Pointer_Create,
       	FDesc_Assumed_Create 
       suggests that this may have something to do with
       allocatable arrays.  But there is no allocatable array in sight!  Is there ANY
       connection with Fortran allocatable arrays?  What does
       FDesc_Alloc_Create do that is different from its mates that requires
       there be three different routines to create and initialize an array descriptor?
 
       Note that while it is entirely true than an implementation may currently
       use different sorts of descriptors for allocatables, assumed-shape arrays,
       and pointers (for example one knows that allocatable dope vectors describe
       contiguous memory but this might be worth storing in a pointer's dope vector),
       that is not an answer to this question absent more specification of how that
       affects usage of the C routines.

3)      This creates an array descriptor (well and good) which describes some
       part of memory as a strided shaped array.  Is the memory managed on the 
       C side? on the Fortran side? both?  What restrictions are there on the
       value of the base address?  Must it point to newly malloc'd memory?
       May it overlap part of existing C or Fortran arrays?  

4)    Is the array descriptor
       produced supposed to remain valid when the routine which called
        FDesc_Alloc_Create returns to its caller?  Are there ways it
        can become invalid after having been valid? What happens if
        FDesc_Alloc_Reset is called with the address of a not-currently-valid 
        array descriptor? Is it required to produce an error?   
        How will it know to do so?

5)   How exactly is FDesc_Allocated supposed to work?
      Its input argument is an array descriptor.  But the array might have been
      created on the C side, which means Fortran has no idea about whether it is
      "allocated" or not;  "allocated" array is a notion that makes sense only on
       the Fortran side.

       One suspects that there is confusion here; it's true that a Fortran allocatable
       array might well be described by multiple dope vectors  (e.g.
       the compiler might maintain one for I and one for P in the below code, but
       they end up describing the same array).
		INTEGER, ALLOCATABLE, TARGET :: I(:)
		INTEGER, POINTER :: P(:)
		ALLOCATE(I(10))
		P=>I
       That doesn't mean that you can create an array descriptor that is 
       different from but as privileged as 
       the dope vector the compiler created to describe I and to keep synchronized
       with its tables.
       The array descriptor created by FDesc_Alloc_Create can't ever
       be the vehicle for (say) deallocating and reallocating I because it
       has no connection to variable I itself.  You could initialize the array
       descriptor to describe I, but after you use FDesc_Alloc_Reset to
       reset its elements, by what logic does it remain a description of I?
       Clearly it doesn't.   Therefore it can't make sense to call
        FDesc_Allocated which asks about allocation status of something that is
       not described by the array descriptor which is its only input.

       Please clarify whether there is intended functionality to permit
       allocatable arrays (on the Fortran side) to be not only described on the C side
      but also have their allocation status modified.
