
                                                          J3/04-414

To:      J3
From:    Dan Nagle
Subject: Simple ASSERT
Date:    2004 October 25

With the wish list overfull, new ideas should be limited.
This paper re-proposes the ASSERT statement, this time
in a simplified form.

The advantages of ASSERT are improved commentary and debugging.
The disadvantage is that these may be done in other ways,
but prehaps not quite so easily.

Number:

Title: Simplified ASSERT Statement

Submitted By: J3

Status: For Consideration

References: Fortran 2003 (DIS)

Basic Functionality: An ASSERT statement has one required argument,
                     COND, which shall evaluate to TRUE.  What happens
                     if the assertion is false is processordent,
                     however, the expectation is that the program will produce
                     an error message and halt.  This behavior is left
                     processor dependent so processors have the option
                     of providing alternatives without being non-conformant.

Rationale:  Assertions aid debugging.  Assertions also serve to document
            a program and help programmers verify that changes to program code
            don't violate assumptions originally made and that users are
            correctly using the code.

            Debugging code may always be added in the form
            of existing kinds of conditional blocks, but these may not be
            clearly distinguishable as debugging code.  Assertions clearly are
            debugging code.  Indeed, they constitute a distinct category
            of conditional code.

            While commentary may be expected to convey the true state
            of a program, haste may cause mere comments to be not updated
            to reflect the actual state of a program.  Because assertions
            serve to debug the program, they may be kept in a more current
            state and therefore may document the program better, too.

Estimated Impact: One new statement must be added to Section 8.
                  No other changes are needed.

Detailed Specification: The form of the proposed ASSERT statement is:

                        ASSERT( <assert-specifier-list> )

                        <assert-specifier> is [COND=] <s-l-e>

                        The COND= specifier identifies the <s-l-e> which
                        shall be true when the ASSERT statement is executed.
                        There must be exactly one COND item on the list.
                        If it is the first item on the list,
                        the COND= may be omitted.  When the <s-l-e> is false,
                        a message is written to ERROR_UNIT identifying
                        the assertion as failing.

                        Note that the assert-specifier-list is a list
                        so future enhancements to the assert statement
                        may add other specifiers without surprise
                        or undue difficulty.

                        With a Note something like this:

                        The usual implementation is that when the <s-l-e>
                        is false when the ASSERT statement is executed,
                        the processor will write to ERROR_UNIT a message
                        and then the program terminates.

                        It is most helpful if the message identifies
                        the source file name and the line number
                        whence the ASSERT statement came, the text
                        of the <s-l-e>, and an indication that
                        an assertion failed.

                        Halting may be the normal consequence
                        of an ASSERT failure, however, the processor
                        might provide a way to continue execution and
                        also might provide a way to disable ASSERT checking
                        on a program-unit basis when it isn't desired
                        to revalidate trusted production codes.

                        End of the Note.

                        Examples:

                        ASSERT( i_what > 0 )

                        when false, execution of this statement writes
                        something like this to ERROR_UNIT:

                        assertion failed: file: snafu.f, line: 42, i_what > 0

History: Submitted to J3 at meeting 170,
         simplified from the glom of 04-105, 04-142, 04-212, 04-219.
