
                                                         J3/04-407

Date:    15 Oct 2004
To:      J3
From:    Richard Maine
Subject: Simplified KIND selection - Specs and illustrative syntax
References: J3/04-270

INTRODUCTION

   This paper proposes specs and illustrative syntax for
   simplified kind selection. The proposal for this feature was
   originally submitted as 04-270 and garnered strong support,
   as documented in 04-302. It appears to have beeen combined
   with 04-121 as a single entry in 04-370r4. However, the
   paper alleging to "complete" that combined proposal makes no
   mention at all of the subject material.

   I find it a bit unfortunate that the combination of these
   two proposals seems to have resulted in the disappearance of
   the one that had substantially stronger support. This
   probably reflects the unfortunate fact that presence of the
   advocate at the meeting is a bigger driver than many other
   factors.

   I suggest that the current attempts to craft edits are not
   only premature, but are detrimental to the job of deciding
   on a feature set. Specs, and perhaps even syntax, can help
   in making that decision, but I view edits at this stage as a
   distracting detriment. I'd say that they were a waste of
   time because so many of them are not in good enough shape to
   be real edits, but I think that it is too generaous to label
   them as a waste; I think them to be an active detriment.

   Therefore, this paper does not propose edits, but restricts
   itself to specs and illustrative syntax. I am not wedded to
   the particular specs proposed here if J3 prefers a different
   direction. Moving the proposal forward to at least specs
   just seems more likely to get results than would a reminder
   that the original proposal got "lost".

REQUIREMENTS

  Requirements were outlined in 04-270. In short review, the
  requirement is to provide a simplified means to select the
  most commonly desired real and integer kinds.

SPECIFICATIONS

  Several possible approaches were outlined in 04-270. I propose
  that we adopt the approach that is intermediate in complexity,
  namely that the standard define named constants for the most
  commonly desired real and integer kinds.

  The approach of standardizing specific kind values would be
  simpler, but seems overly restrictive. It also raises issues
  of compatibility with existing code and compilers, which
  would turn this otherwise simple proposal into a much
  larger issue. The edits might be small, but the implications
  would not be.

  The approach of extending the selected_*_kind intrinsics or
  adding new similar ones would provide more flexibility and
  lessen the confusions involved in translating user requirements
  into decimal digits of precision. However, it does not do
  much about simplification, which is the primary requirement
  here.

  The approach of standardizing some named constants seems
  adequately simple without being restrictive or raising
  compatibility issues. It also has the advantage of being
  completely trivial to implement.

  My proposal is restricted to kinds with exact sizes. Adding
  too many options would increase the complexity of the choice
  to be made by users and would result in issues of interoperability
  of codes where different users made different choices of how
  to specify the kinds. Note that the existing selected_*_kind
  intrinsics provide the capability of specifying minimum
  requirements and could be extended in many ways (although
  that is not proposed here). Exact sizes are the simplest
  and most commonly requested requirement, and one that the
  standard currently provides no facility for (except in C
  interop, which has it only for integers - nor for reals).

  I also restrict the proposal to integers and reals because
  they are the common cases. User specification of specific
  sizes for logical kinds is rare (and even more rare when you
  rule out the cases where logical is being used as a synonym
  for unsigned integer, which is a nonstandard and nonportable
  practice anyway). User specification of character kinds is
  also rare.

  Therefore, I propose that the specifications be:

  The standard will specify the names of several named constants
  in the ISO_FORTRAN_ENV intrinsic module. These named constants
  will have kind values for the representations described below.

  Named constants provided will be for the kinds of integers whose
  storage sizes are exactly 8, 16, 32, and 64 bits, and for the
  kinds of reals whose storage sizes are exactly 32, 64, and 128 bits.
  Additionally, named constants will be provided for the kinds of
  default integer, default real, and double precision real.

  If the processor supports more than one representation with the
  specified size, it is processor-dependent which of those
  representations the named constant corresponds to.

  If the processsor does not support a particular representation,
  the value of the corresponding named constant will be one of
  two negative values specified by the standard. If the processor
  does not support a representation with the exact size requested
  or with any larger size, the value shall be -1. If the processor
  does not support a representation with the exact size requested,
  but does support a representation with a larger size, the value
  shall be -2.

  This proposal does not require the compiler to support any
  particular kind. Nor does this proposal specify the kind values,
  which remain processor-dependent.


ILLUSTRATIVE SYNTAX

  This syntax suggestion is purely illustrative for now. It seems
  too early to debate exact names when it is not yet decided
  what things need names and what the meaning would be. The
  exact names are really the only syntax matter relevant to
  the proposed specifications.

  If the above specifications are accepted, a possible set of
  names is:

   int8_kind, int16_kind, int32_kind, int64_kind
   real32_kind, real64_kind, real128_kind
   int_default_kind, real_default_kind, real_double_kind
