
                                                    J3/05-009

Date:     27-Nov-2004
To:       J3
From:     JOR/Stan Whitlock
Subject:  009 - Features under consideration by J3 for F03+

At J3 meeting #170, the F03+ New Features spreadsheet 04-423r1
showed that 31 tasks were "done".  The papers specifying the
specifications and syntax for these features are gathered here,
using the form specified by WG5 for a Journal of Requirements
entry, in J3 standing document 009.

------------------------------------------------------------------

           009 - Features under consideration by J3 for F03+

[Keep this text document to 70 characters per line]

------------------------------------------------------------------

Number: J3-001

Title: Enhanced STOP

Submitted By: J3

Status: Specification complete

References: 04-007 8.4 STOP Statement page 170
            04-107, 04-319r2

Basic Functionality:

  Trivially enhance the STOP statement for modern processors

Rationale:

  The current STOP statement is vaguely defined, and has not been
  updated in accordance with modern practice.  Furthermore, its
  syntax is peculiarly limited, going back to Fortran 66 days.

Estimated Impact:

  At 167, J3/JoR estimated the impact as "Trivial".  This is
  recorded in 04-265r1.

Discussion:

  Modern practice suggests that
  (a) the stop code should be written to the standard error unit
  (b) an integer stop code should be returned as the process exit
      status.

  There are four peculiarities of STOP syntax:

  (1) An integer stop code is limited to 5 digits.
  (2) An integer stop code must be a literal constant, it cannot
      be a named constant.
  (3) A stop code must be a literal or named constant, it cannot
      be a constant (i.e. initialization) expression.
  (4) A stop code must be constant, it cannot be a non-constant
      expression.

  This paper advocates lifting all of these restrictions.  Lifting
  all of them probably has less impact (or at least no more impact)
  than releasing some of them, as the processor can then simply use
  its normal expression evaluation mechanism.

Detailed Specification:

  (1) The stop code shall be allowed to be a scalar initialization
      expression of type default integer or default character.
  (2) Recommend that the stop code be displayed on ERROR_UNIT.
  (3) Recommend that if the stop code is of integer type, it should
      be used as the process exit status (if the processor even has
      such a concept).
  (4) Note that the processor might use only a portion of such a
      stop code for the exit status.

History:

  Paper 04-102    meeting 167  Submitted
        04-319r2          169  Accepted as complete

------------------------------------------------------------------

Number: J3-002

Title: GET_IO_UNIT

Submitted By: J3

Status: Specification complete

References: 04-107, 04-186, 04-328

Basic Functionality:

  Add an procedure to ISO_FORTRAN_ENV to return a logical
  unit number which may be opened.

Rationale:

  Logical unit numbers are processor-dependent, some method
  of getting one should be supported.

  Some programs (for example, multithreaded programs)
  may want units to be distributed according to a rule
  (for example, 1000 times thread number plus offset).
  Thus, some flexibility should be part of this intrinsic.

Estimated Impact:

  The impact was estimated by J3/JoR at 167 as Trivial.

Detailed Specification:

  See paper 04-327 regards possible renumbering
  of 13.8.2.  These edits assume that paper passes.

  [360:33++] Add:
    "13.8.2.2.x GET_IO_UNIT( UNIT, [ NOTUNIT, MINUNIT,
                             MAXUNIT, IOSTAT, IOMSG ] )

     *Description.* Return <file-unit-number> values that exist,
                    are not connected to an external file,
                    and can be connected to an external file.

     *Class.* Subroutine.

     *Arguments.*

       UNIT shall be of type integer and may be of
            any rank.  It is an INTENT(OUT) argument.  It is
            assigned <file-unit-number> values of logical
            units that exist, are not connected to an
            external file, and can be connected to an
            external file.  It shall not be assigned a value
            equal to INPUT_UNIT, OUTPUT_UNIT or ERROR_UNIT.
            If it is scalar, one <file-unit-number> value is
            returned; if it is an array, SIZE(UNIT) unique
            <file-unit-number> values are returned.

        NOTUNIT    shall be of type integer.  It shall
        (optional) be a scalar or a rank 1 array.  It is
                   an INTENT(IN) argument.  The value of UNIT,
                   or an element of UNIT if it is an array,
                   shall not be equal to the value of NOTUNIT,
                   or any element of NOTUNIT if it is an array.

         MINUNIT    shall be a scalar of type integer.
         (optional) It is an INTENT(IN) argument.  The value
                    of UNIT, or an element of UNIT if it is
                    an array, shall not be less than the value
                    of MINUNIT.

         MAXUNIT    shall be a scalar of type integer.
         (optional) It is an INTENT(IN) argument.  The value
                    of UNIT, or an element of UNIT if it is
                    an array, shall not be greater than the
                    value of MAXUNIT.

         IOSTAT     shall be a scalar of type default integer.
         (optional) It is an INTENT(OUT) argument.  It is
                    assigned the value zero if the variable
                    associated with UNIT contains valid
                    <file-unit-number> values and assigned a
                    processor-dependent positive value otherwise.

         IOMSG      shall be a scalar of type default character.
         (optional) It is an INTENT(INOUT)  argument. It is
                    assigned a processor-dependent error message
                    if the value of the variable associated with
                    the IOSTAT argument indicates an error
                    occurred.  Otherwise, its value is unchanged."

History:

  Paper 04-107   meeting 167  Submitted {same as 04-186}
        04-328           168  Accepted as complete

------------------------------------------------------------------

Number: J3-003

Title: EXECUTE_COMMAND_LINE

Submitted By: J3

Status: Specification complete

References: 04-106, 04-329r3

Basic Functionality:

  Add a procedure to ISO_FORTRAN_ENV
  to cause an external program to execute.

Rationale:

  Most processors provide a means to execute an external
  program, but the syntax varies.  Furthermore, some processors
  may support only synchronous execution of external programs,
  so this processor limitation must be taken into account.

  Some programs may want to execute another program
  to generate an input file or to operate jointly via
  a pipe, thus program control over synchronous versus
  asynchronous execution should be supplied to some extent.

Estimated Impact:

  The impact was estimated by J3 at 167 as Small.

Detailed Specification:

  Executes a command line externally to the program.
  Whether the command line is interpreted by a shell
  is unspecified.  Require synchronous execution and
  allow asynchronous execution.  If synchronous execution,
  allow recovery of the executed process exit status.
  Allow processor-dependent error conditions.

  See paper 04-327 regards possible renumbering
  of 13.8.2.  These edits assume that paper passes.

    [360:33++] Add:

      "13.8.2.2.x EXECUTE_COMMAND_LINE( COMMAND, [ WAIT,
                  EXITSTAT, CMDSTAT, CMDMSG ] )

       *Description.* Execute the command line identified
                      by the string COMMAND.  The processor must
                      support synchronous and may support
                      asynchronous execution of the external program.

        *Class.* Subroutine.

        *Arguments.*

          COMMAND shall be of type default character and
                  shall be a scalar.  It is an INTENT(IN)
                  argument.  It identifies the command line
                  to be executed.  The interpretation is
                  processor-dependent.

           WAIT       shall be of type default logical and shall
           (optional) be a scalar.  It is an INTENT(IN) argument.
                      When present and true, EXECUTE_COMMAND_LINE
                      returns after the indicated command line
                      has completed execution.  When present and
                      false, EXECUTE_COMMAND_LINE returns after
                      the indicated command line has started
                      execution.  When not present, the effect is
                      as if present with a value of true.

           EXITSTAT   shall be of type default integer and shall
           (optional) be a scalar.  It is an INTENT(INOUT) argument.
                      It shall not be present if WAIT is
                      present with a value of false.  If WAIT is
                      present with a value of true, the value of
                      EXITSTAT is the processor-dependent exit
                      status of the command line, if available.
                      Otherwise, the value is unchanged.

           CMDSTAT    shall be of type default integer and shall
           (optional) be a scalar.  It is an INTENT(OUT) argument.
                      It is assigned the value zero if
                      no error occurred during EXECUTE_COMMAND_LINE
                      and assigned a processor-dependent
                      positive value otherwise.  If an error occurs
                      and CMDSTAT is not present, execution of
                      the program terminates.  If the processor
                      does not support the concept of command
                      lines, the value is 1.

           CMDMSG     shall be of type default character and shall
           (optional) be a scalar.  It is an INTENT(INOUT) argument.
                      It is assigned a processor-dependent error
                      message if the value of the variable
                      associated with the CMDSTAT argument
                      indicates an error occurred.  Otherwise,
                      the value of CMDMSG is unchanged."

History:

 Paper 04-106    meeting 167  Submitted
       04-329r3          169  Accepted as complete

------------------------------------------------------------------

Number: J3-004

Title: STORAGE_SIZE

Submitted By: J3

Status: Specification complete

References: 04-120, 04-342

Basic Functionality:

  Add a procedure to ISO_FORTRAN_ENV
  to return the size in bits of its argument.

Rationale:

  There are situations where a program needs to know
  the size of an entity.

Estimated Impact:

  The impact was estimated by J3 at 167 as Small.

Detailed Specification:

  A procedure to return the size in bits of its argument.

  See paper 04-327 regards possible renumbering
  of 13.8.2.  These edits assume that paper passes.

  [125:41+] Add list item

    "(4+) the intrinsic module function STORAGE_SIZE,"

  [360:33+++] Add section

    "13.8.2.2.x STORAGE_SIZE (X [, KIND])

      *Description.*  Returns the storage size in bits for a
                      nonpointer nonallocatable scalar
                      of the declared type of X.

      *Class.*  Inquiry function.

      *Arguments.*

        X               may be of intrinsic or derived type.  It
                        shall not be polymorphic.  If it is
                        of derived type, that type shall be
                        a SEQUENCE or interoperable type and
                        shall have no allocatable ultimate
                        components.  If its type has
                        any deferred type parameters, it shall
                        be a pointer that is associated or
                        an allocatable object that is
                        allocated. It may be a scalar or an array.

        KIND (optional) shall be a scalar integer initialization
                        expression.

        *Result Characteristics.*  Integer scalar.

                         If KIND is present, the kind
                         type parameter is that
                         specified by the value
                         of KIND; otherwise, the kind
                         type parameter is that
                         of default integer type.

        *Result Value.*  The result value is the size in bits
                         of the storage unit (16.4.3.1)
                         in a storage association context
                         for a nonpointer nonallocatable scalar
                         with the declared type and
                         type parameters of X.

         *Example.*  STORAGE_SIZE(1.0) returns the number of bits
                     required to store an entity of type default
                     real."

History:

  Paper 04-120    meeting 167  Submitted {also N1539}
        04-342            169  Accepted as complete

------------------------------------------------------------------

Number: J3-005

Title: C_SIZEOF

Submitted By: J3

Status: Specification complete

References: 04-104, 04-344r1

Basic Functionality:

  Add a procedure to ISO_C_BINDING to return the size of its
  argument as per C sizeof.

Rationale:

  There are situations where a program needs to know
  the size of an entity, as expressed in C.

Estimated Impact:

  The impact was estimated by J3 at 167 as Small.

Detailed Specification:

  A procedure to return the size of its argument as per C.

  [125:41+] Add list item

    "(4++) the intrinsic module function C_SIZEOF,"

  [395:31+++] (after the Note) Add section

    "15.1.2.6 C_SIZEOF (X)

       *Description.*  Returns the size, as defined
                       by the C sizeof operator (Section
                       6.5.3.4 of the C International Standard),
                       of the argument X.

       *Class.*  Inquiry function.

       *Arguments.*

          X              X shall have interoperable type and type
                         parameters. It may be a scalar or an array
                         that is not assumed-size.


       *Result Characteristics.*  Integer scalar
                                  of kind C_SIZE_T (15.2.1).

       *Result Value.*  The result value is the size of X
                        as defined by the sizeof operator (Section
                        6.5.3.4 of the C International Standard)
                        of the companion C processor.  If
                        the companion processor is not a C processor,
                        the result value is processor dependent."

History:

  Paper 04-104    meeting 167  Submitted
        04-344r1          169  Accepted as complete

------------------------------------------------------------------

Number: J3-006

Title: Find all available logical and character kinds

Submitted By: J3

Status: Specification complete

References: 04-121, 04-346r2

Basic Functionality:

  Add constants to iso_fortran_env which specify
  all available logical kind values and
  all available character kind names.

Rationale:

  A program (subject or not to preprocessing) or
  an automatic code generator may have a preferred kind
  or a preferred ranking of possibly available kinds
  for entities of logical and character type.  Currently,
  the only means available is to read the documentation
  and manually add the specific values needed.

  For example, a very large frequently used but infrequently
  updated logical array may be best expressed as an array
  of the smallest kind of logical.  Default logical may exhaust
  the processor's fastest cache, leaving no space for numerical
  data.  What is the smallest logical available?
  There is no automatically available answer now.

Estimated Impact:

  The impact was estimated by JoR at 167 to be trivial.
  Only iso_fortran_env is affected.

Detailed Specification:

  [360:4a+]

    "13.8.2.1- CHARACTER_KIND_NAMES

       The values of the default character rank 1 array
       CHARACTER_KIND_NAMES are the names, when any trailing
       blanks are removed, which may be passed
       to the SELECTED_CHAR_KIND procedure to obtain
       a valid kind value.

       The lower bound of CHARACTER_KIND_NAMES is one; the size
       of CHARACTER_KIND_NAMES is the number of character names
       supported by the processor.  The names are stored
       in non-decreasing order of storage size of objects
       of the corresponding kind."

     [360:26+] Add

       "13.8.2.6+ LOGICAL_KIND_VALUES

          The values of the default integer rank 1 array
          LOGICAL_KIND_VALUES are the kind values of all available
          logical kinds.

          The lower bound of LOGICAL_KIND_VALUES is one; the size
          of LOGICAL_KIND_VALUES is the number of logical kind
          values supported by the processor.  The values are
          stored in non-decreasing order of storage size
         of objects of the corresponding kind."

History:

  Paper 04-121    meeting 167  Submitted
        04-346r2          169  Accepted as complete

------------------------------------------------------------------

Number: J3-007

Title: Construct Name Local to Construct

Submitted By: J3

Status: Specification complete

References: 04-158, 04-348r1

Basic Functionality:

  Make a construct name be local to its construct.

Rationale:

  Construct names are only referenced from within the construct.
  Therefore, it makes sense to use a construct scope for the name.
  Further, within a local scope, a construct name might naturally
  be desirable more than once.  For example, within a local scope,
  an if-block might naturally be named "check_iostat" following
  more than one statement containing an iostat specifier, or more
  than one do-construct might be naturally named "all_rows",
  "all_columns", or "all_planes", etc.

  Of course, for cycle and exit to work properly, nested constructs
  must all have names unique within the nest.

Estimated Impact:

  3 or 4.

Detailed Specification:

  (1) Define a construct name to have construct scope.
  (2) Remove construct names from all local entity classes, so that
      it can be the same as any local name and any global name.
  (3) Nested constructs shall not have the same name.  (Note: after
      removal from local entities, this needs to be explicitly stated
      in the standard.)

  Incomplete Illustrative Edits:

    [406:4-5] remove "named constructs,"

    [409:29+] add new paragraph
      "The name of a named construct has a scope of that
       construct.  It may be the same as any local identifier or
       global identifier.  The <construct-name> of a contained named
       construct shall not be the same as a <construct-name> of any
       of its containing named constructs."

History:

  Paper 04-158    meeting 167  Submitted
        04-348r1          169  Accepted as complete

------------------------------------------------------------------

Number: J3-008

Title: Rewrite attribute requirements

Submitted by: Malcolm Cohen

Status: Specification complete

References: 04-359

Basic Functionality:

  None.

Rationale:

  The current method of specifying the requirements on various
  attributes, such as EXTERNAL and POINTER, is too hard to
  understand and too prone to error.

Estimated impact:

  Non-trivial Editorial.

Detailed Specification:

  Rewrite the attribute specification parts of chapters 5 and 12
  so that

    (1) the syntax just says what attribute it provides
    (2) there is a separate attribute section which
        (a) contains the requirements (like "must be a dummy
            argument for VALUE")
        (b) describes the effects.

History:

  Paper 04-359    meeting 169  Submitted
        04-359            170  Accepted as complete

------------------------------------------------------------------

Number: J3-009

Title: IO_UNIT standard derived type

Submitted By: J3

Status: Specification complete

References: 04-369

Requirements:

  Have a mechanism for i/o units that

    - does not confuse i/o units with integers (improved
      abstraction)
    - does not require the user to manage their use (ease of use)
    - avoids clashes between user-written code and existing
      third-party libraries
    - avoids race conditions in multi-threaded programs, without
      requiring the routine being used in a multi-threaded program
      to have different code (viz explicit calls to locking routines)
      from when it is being used without a threading library.

Basic Functionality:

  Add a derived type to ISO_FORTRAN_ENV to represent an i/o unit.
  Allow values of this type to be used everywhere that a unit number
  can be used.

Rationale:

  Logical unit numbers are processor-dependent, managing their
  use is difficult.  Integer values are not a good model of a file
  handle.

  Simply finding a currently unused integer value is not
  sufficiently powerful to avoid known problems with clashes and
  race conditions - having a standard intrinsic to return an unused
  unit number can not help in this regard, no matter how
  sophisticated we make the intrinsic.

Estimated Impact:

  Not Quite Trivial.

Detailed Specification:

  (1) That a standard derived type, in the intrinsic module
      ISO_FORTRAN_ENV, be provided to represent file handles.  This
      derived type is referred to as IO_UNIT hereafter.
  (2) That the IO_UNIT type be opaque.
  (3) That OPEN not be required to take a file unit number, but
      allowed to return an IO_UNIT value instead.
  (4) That an IO_UNIT value be usable in place of a
      <file-unit-number> in all other i/o statements.
  (5) That derived-type i/o subroutines not be modified; these will
      continue to receive some processor-determined  negative number
      for the unit - because these are supplied by the processor
      and therefore cannot clash with user-determined unit numbers,
      this is not a problem.

Syntax:

  (1) That the derived type be named IO_UNIT.
  (2a) That the UNIT= specifier on the OPEN be allowed to take a
       TYPE(IO_UNIT) variable instead of an integer value,
  or
  (2b) That a new specifier IO_UNIT=<io_unit_variable> be allowed on
       OPEN if the UNIT=<file-unit-number> specifier is omitted.

Edits:

would be premature in the absence of an agreed base document.

Sections needing modification are:
  9.4.0 The unit definition
  9.4.5 the description of OPEN
  13.8.2 to mention the derived type.

History:

  Paper 04-369    meeting 169  Submitted
        04-369            170  Accepted as complete

------------------------------------------------------------------

Number: J3-010

Title: Allow empty CONTAINS part

Submitted by: J3

Status: Specification complete

References:  04-189, 04-379

Basic Functionality:

  Allow empty CONTAINS part

Rationale:

  Is there a good reason that a module, procedure or type
  definition has to have procedure definitions after the CONTAINS
  statement? What would be hurt by allowing not to have any?
  Sometimes when programs are generated automatically, they end up
  with an empty CONTAINS part, and then you have to go fix it
  manually, or whine (ineffectually) to the unsympathetic guys
  who wrote the processor (if they're still in business), for which
  you have no source code.  It's also not unreasonable to start
  off development of a module or type with an empty CONTAINS part,
  with the intent of filling it in later.

Estimated Impact:

  Trivial.  Change a few syntax rules.  No new words needed
  anywhere.  Estimated at J3 meeting 169 to be at 3 on the JKR
  scale.

Detailed Specification:

  Allow an empty CONTAINS part in external and module procedures,
  modules, and derived type definitions.

History:

  Paper 04-189    meeting 167  Submitted
        04-379            170  Accepted as complete

------------------------------------------------------------------

Number: J3-011

Title: Coroutines

Submitted by: J3

Status: Specification complete

References: 04-345, 04-380r2

Basic Functionality:

  Provide for coroutines.

Rationale:

  In many cases when a "library" procedure needs access to
  user-provided code, the user-provided code needs access to data
  of which the library procedure is unaware.  There are at least
  three ways by which the user-provided code can gain access to
  these entities:

    o The user-provided code can be implemented as a procedure
      that is invoked by the library procedure, with the extra data
      stored in globally-accessible variables.

    o The user-provided code can be implemented as a procedure that
      takes a dummy argument of extensible type, which procedure is
      invoked by the library procedure, with the extra entities in
      an extension of that type.

    o The library procedure can provide for "reverse communication",
      that is, when it needs access to user-provided code it returns
      instead of calling a procedure.  When the user-provided code
      reinvokes the library procedure, it somehow finds its way back
      to the appropriate place.

  Each of these solutions has drawbacks.  Entities that are needlessly
  public increase maintenance expense.  If the user-provided procedure
  expects to find its extra data in an extension of the type of an
  argument passed through the library procedure, the dummy argument
  has to be polymorphic, and the user-provided code has to execute a
  SELECT TYPE construct to access the extension.  Reverse
  communication causes a mess that requires GO TO statements to
  resume the library procedure where it left off, which in turn
  requires one to simulate conventional control structures using GO
  TO statements.  This reduces reliability and increases development
  and maintenance costs.

  Reverse communication is, however, a blunt-force simulation of a
  well-behaved control structure that has been well-known to computer
  scientists for decades: The "coroutine".  Coroutines would allow
  user-provided code needed by library procedures more easily to gain
  access to data of which the library procedure is unaware, without
  causing the disruption of the control structure of the library
  procedure that reverse communication now causes.

  Coroutines are useful to implement "iterator" procedures, that can
  be used both to enumerate the elements of a data structure and to
  control iteration of a loop that is processing those elements.

Estimated Impact:

  Minor additions to Subclause 2.3.4 and Section 12.
  Estimated at J3 meeting 169 to be at 5 on the JKR scale.

Detailed Specification:

  Provide two new statements, which we here call SUSPEND and RESUME.

  Provide a new form of subprogram, the "coroutine", that cannot
  contain an ENTRY statement, and is the only subprogram in which
  a SUSPEND statement is allowed.  A coroutine requires an explicit
  interface.

  Coroutines can stand on their own, or be type-bound procedures or
  actual arguments.  They can be procedure pointer targets, provided
  the pointer has explicit interface.  Generic coroutines are
  allowed, provided the <generic-spec> is <generic-name>.  Recursive
  and internal coroutines are allowed.

  When a coroutine is invoked by a CALL statement, execution continues
  with the coroutine's first executable construct.  When a coroutine
  executes a SUSPEND statement, execution continues after the CALL
  or RESUME statement that initiated or resumed its execution; when
  a RESUME statement is executed, execution resumes after the SUSPEND
  statement.  When a coroutine executes a RETURN or END statement,
  execution continues after the CALL or RESUME statement that
  initiated or resumed its execution, and it is an error if one
  later attempts to RESUME it without first calling it.

  A type-bound coroutine shall be initiated using a variable, and
  resumed using the same variable.  A coroutine that is initiated
  using a pointer shall be resumed using the same pointer.  Otherwise,
  a coroutine shall be resumed from the same scoping unit in which
  it is initiated.

  Data entities:

  Variables within a coroutine can have the SAVE attribute, with
  the usual implications.

  Unsaved local variables within a coroutine retain their definition
  status and values from SUSPEND to RESUME.  Automatic objects in
  addition retain their bounds and length parameter values.  The
  specification part is not elaborated upon resumption. If a
  coroutine references a module or common block, it is considered
  to continue to reference it between SUSPEND and RESUME.

  A change in the value of a variable between SUSPEND and RESUME
  does not affect the bounds or length parameter values of automatic
  variables within the coroutine.

  Argument association does survive execution of a SUSPEND statement.

  Activation records:

  The above rules guarantee that coroutines can be reentrant.  The
  following paragraphs suggest one way to implement those rules.

  When a coroutine suspends execution by executing a SUSPEND
  statement, its activation record is saved.  When a coroutine is
  resumed, its activation record is restored.  Therefore there is no
  restriction on where a SUSPEND statement is allowed to appear among
  the executable constructs.

  A type-bound coroutine's activation record is saved in and restored
  from an extension of the variable by which its execution is
  initiated or resumed, i.e., in X, if it is referenced as X%C. If a
  coroutine is accessed by a procedure pointer, its activation record
  is saved in the pointer.  Otherwise, the processor stores the
  activation record locally (so CALL and RESUME have to be in the
  same scoping unit).

History:

  Paper 03-258r1 meeting 166  Submitted in section 1.1
        04-149r1         167
        04-345           169
        04-380r2         170  Accepted as complete

------------------------------------------------------------------

Number: J3-012

Title: Use ALLOCATABLE and POINTER attributes in generic resolution

Submitted By: J3

Status: Specification complete

References: 04-170, 04-381

Basic Functionality:

  Use ALLOCATABLE and POINTER attributes in generic resolution

Rationale:

  I have a generic interface ALLOCATE_TEST that allocates an object,
  tests the status, and prints an error message if an error occurs.
  I cannot have a specific interface for a to-be-allocated argument
  that has the POINTER attribute, and another for a to-be-allocated
  argument with the same type, kind type parameters and rank that
  has the ALLOCATABLE attribute.  So I need different generic names
  for allocatable objects and pointer objects.  If I change an
  object from pointer to allocatable or vice-versa, I have to track
  down all of the ALLOCATE_TEST invocations for that variable and
  change them to the other one.  Avoiding this labor was one of the
  justifications for the generic facility.

Estimated Impact:

  Minor.  Estimated at J3 meeting 169 to be at 5 on the JKR scale.
  It is more likely at 3 on the JKR scale, since it appears that the
  only place where edits are necessary is 407:29.

Detailed Specification:

  Allow the POINTER and ALLOCATABLE attributes to be used as the last
  resort for generic resolution:  If the only difference between two
  specific interfaces is that in one there is a dummy argument that
  has neither the POINTER nor ALLOCATABLE attribute, and the
  corresponding argument in the other one has one of those attributes,
  the interface is ambiguous.  If one has the POINTER attribute and
  the corresponding one has the ALLOCATABLE attribute the interface
  is not ambiguous, at least so far as that pair of specific
  procedures is concerned.

  If a dummy argument has the POINTER or ALLOCATABLE attribute, the
  corresponding actual argument is required to have the same
  attribute.  Therefore this change would not invalidate any existing
  program.

History:

  Paper 04-170    meeting 167  Submitted
        04-381            170  Accepted as complete

------------------------------------------------------------------

Number: J3-013

Title: Internal subprograms as actual arguments and procedure
       pointer targets

Submitted By: J3

Status: Specification complete

References: 04-148, 03-258r1, section 1.7, 04-382r1

Basic Functionality:

  Allow internal subprograms as actual arguments and procedure
  pointer targets

Rationale:

  In many cases where one uses a subprogram as an actual argument,
  it needs access to entities of which the procedure to which it
  is passed is unaware.  If the actual argument were an internal
  subprogram, it could access these extra entities by host
  association.

  Since the 2003 standard does not require the TARGET attribute
  for a nonpointer dummy procedure that is a procedure pointer
  target, we cannot simultaneously allow internal procedures to
  be actual arguments and prohibit them to be procedure pointer
  targets.

Estimated Impact:

  Small.  Minor changes necessary in Sections 7, 12 and 16, and
  maybe Annex C.  Estimated at J3 meeting 169 to be at 4 on the
  JKR scale.

Detailed Specification:

  Allow an internal subprogram to be an actual argument:

  There are two possibilities concerning the host of the internal
  subprogram:

  o Allow the host of the internal subprogram to be recursive.
    Make it clear that accesses by host association from the
    internal subprogram to entities of its host are accesses to
    entities in the instance of its host as of the instant the
    internal subprogram was used as an actual argument, not to
    entities in the instance of its host as of the instant the
    internal subprogram is invoked.

  o Require that the host of the internal subprogram is not
    recursive.  In this case, there can only be one instance of
    the procedure defined by the host subprogram.  This restriction
    could later be relaxed.  Many processors may relax it as an
    extension.

 Allow an internal subprogram to be a procedure pointer target:

  Similar considerations regarding recursive hosts apply.  It is
  unavoidable that the same restriction applies to internal
  subprograms used as procedure pointer targets and used as
  actual arguments.

  If internal subprograms of recursive hosts are allowed to be
  procedure pointers, make it clear that the instance of the host
  to which accesses from the internal subprogram to that host by
  host association refer, when it is invoked by way of the pointer,
  is the instance as of the instant the procedure was associated
  with the pointer, which is not necessarily the instance as of
  the instant the internal subprogram is invoked via the pointer.

  Make sure that a procedure pointer associated with an internal
  subprogram becomes undefined when the instance of the procedure
  defined by its host subprogram that was in existence at the
  instant the pointer association was established ceases to exist.

History:

  Paper 04-148    meeting 167  Submitted
        04-382r1          170  Accepted as complete

------------------------------------------------------------------

Number: J3-014

Title: Parameterized module facility

Submitted By: J3

Status: Specification complete

References: 04-153, 04-383r1

Basic Functionality:

  Provide a facility whereby a module or subprogram can be developed
  in a generic form, and then applied to any appropriate type.

Rationale:

  Many algorithms can be applied to more than one type.  Many
  algorithms that can only be applied to one type can be applied to
  more than one kind.  It is tedious, expensive, and error prone -
  especially during maintenance - to develop algorithms that are
  identical except for type declarations to operate on different
  types or kinds.

  Generic modules are useful to package types together with their
  type-bound procedures, so that when they are instantiated, they
  are consistent.  This cannot be guaranteed for parameterized types.

Estimated Impact:

  Moderate to extensive, depending on how it's done.  The solution
  proposed here can be implemented mostly with changes in Section 11,
  and perhaps a few changes in Section 4.  Estimated at J3 meeting
  169 to be at 6 on the JKR scale.

Detailed Specification:

  Provide a variety of module called a "generic module".  A generic
  module is a template or pattern for generating specific instances.
  It has "generic parameters" but is otherwise structurally similar
  to a nongeneric module.  A generic parameter can be a type, a data
  object, a procedure, a generic interface, a nongeneric module, or
  a generic module.

  By substituting concrete values for its generic parameters, one
  can create an "instance of a generic module".  Entities from
  generic modules cannot be accessed by use association.  Rather,
  entities can be accessed from instances of them.  Instances of
  generic modules have all of the properties of nongeneric modules,
  except that they are always local entities of the scoping units
  in which they are instantiated.

  Provide a means to create instances of generic modules by
  substituting concrete values for their generic parameters

  Provide a means to access entities from instances of generic
  modules by use association.

  It is proposed at this time that generic modules do not have
  submodules.

  0.1 Priority for features

  The features of generic modules depend primarily upon what
  varieties of entities are allowed as generic parameters.

  The priority of what should be allowed for generic parameters
  and their corresponding instance parameters is, with most
  important first:

     ---------------------------------------------------
     Generic parameter     Associated instance parameter
     ===================================================
     Type                  Type
     ---------------------------------------------------
     Data entity           Initialization expression
                           Variable
     ---------------------------------------------------
     Specific procedure    Specific procedure
     ---------------------------------------------------
     Generic interface     Generic interface
     ---------------------------------------------------
     Non-generic module    Non-generic module
     ---------------------------------------------------
     Generic module        Generic module
     ---------------------------------------------------

  To fit the proposal within the development schedule, it may
  be necessary to reduce the present scope of the proposal.
  If so, less-important features should be removed before
  more-important ones.

  0.2 Definition of a generic module -- general principles

  A generic module may stand on its own as a global entity,
  or may be a local entity defined within a program, module or
  subprogram.  It shall not be defined within another generic
  module.  If it is defined within another scoping unit, instances
  of it access that scoping unit by host association.  This is
  useful if a particular scoping unit is the only place where
  it's needed, or if instances need to share an entity such as
  a type, procedure or variable.

  A second axis of simplification is to prohibit generic modules
  to be defined within other scoping units.  If this is prohibited,
  instances should nonetheless not access scoping units where they
  are instantiated by host association, so as to preserve the
  possibility to extend to the functionality described here at a
  later time.

  The MODULE statement that introduces a generic module differs
  from one that introduces a nongeneric module by having a list
  of generic parameter names.

  The "interface" of a generic module is the list of the sets of
  characteristics of its generic parameters.  The interface shall
  be explicitly declared, that is, the variety of entity of each
  generic parameter, and the characteristics required of its
  associated actual parameter when an instance is created, shall
  be declared.  There shall be no optional parameters.  Generic
  parameters and their associated instance parameters are described
  in detail in section 8.4 below.

  Other than the appearance of generic parameters in the MODULE
  statement, and their declarations, generic modules are
  structurally similar to nongeneric modules, as defined by R1104:

  R1104 <module> <<is>>  <module-stmt>
                       [ <specification-part> ]
                       [ <module-subprogram-part> ]
                         <end-module-stmt>

  although it may be necessary to relax statement-ordering
  restrictions a little bit.

  0.3 Instantiation of a generic module and use of the instance --
      general principles

  An instance of a generic module is created by the appearance of
  a USE statement that refers to that generic module, and provides
  concrete values for each of the generic module's generic
  parameters.   These concrete values are called "instance
  parameters".  The instance parameters in the USE statement
  correspond to the module's generic parameters either by position
  or by name, in the same way as for arguments in procedure
  references or component specifiers in structure constructors.
  The characteristics of each instance parameter shall be
  consistent with the corresponding generic parameter.

  By substituting the concrete values of instance parameters for
  corresponding generic parameters, an "instance" of a generic
  module is created, or "instantiated".  An instance of a generic
  module is a module, but it is a local entity of the scoping unit
  where it is instantiated.  It does not, however, access by host
  association the scoping unit where it is instantiated.  Rather,
  it accesses by host association the scoping unit where the
  generic module is defined.

  Each local entity within an instance of a generic module is
  distinct from the corresponding entity in a different instance,
  even if both instances are instantiated with identical instance
  parameters.

  A generic module shall not be an instance parameter of an
  instance of itself, either directly or indirectly.

  A generic module may be instantiated and accessed in two ways:

  o By instantiating it and giving it a name, and then accessing
    entities from the named instance by use association.  Named
    instances are created by a USE statement of the form

      USE :: <named-instance-specification-list>

    where a <named-instance-specification> is of the form
    <instance-name> => <instance-specification>, and
    <instance-specification> is of the form
    <generic-module-name> ( <instance-parameter-list> ).

    In this case, the <only-list> and <rename-list> are not
    permitted - since this does not access the created instance
    by use association.

    Entities are then accessed from those instances by USE
    statements that look like R1109:

  R1109 <use-stmt> <<is>> USE [ [ , <module-nature> ] :: ] \smudge
                 \smudge <module-name> [ , <rename-list> ]
                   <<or>> USE [ [ , <module-nature> ] :: ] \smudge
                 \smudge <module-name> , ONLY : [ <only-list> ]

    but with <module-name> replaced by <instance-name>.

  o By instantiating it without giving it a name, and accessing
    entities from that instance within the same statement.  In this
    case, the USE statement looks like <use-stmt>, but with
    <module-name> replaced by <instance-specification>.

  In either case, a <module-nature> could either be prohibited, or
  required with a new value such as GENERIC or INSTANCE.

  Alternatively, a new statement such as INSTANTIATE might be used
  instead of the above-described variations on the USE statement,
  at least in the named-instance case.  In the anonymous-instance
  case it would be desirable to use the USE statement, to preserve
  functionality of <rename-list> and <only-list> without needing to
  describe them all over again for a new statement.

  Since instances are essentially modules, but are always local
  entities within the program units where they are instantiated, it
  seems fatuous to prohibit nongeneric modules within other program
  units.  It would be reasonable to limit the nesting depth, as we
  do for subprograms.  For example, it would be reasonable to prohibit
  either a generic module or a nongeneric module to be defined within
  an internal or generic module.

  0.4 Generic parameters and associated instance parameters

  A generic parameter may be a type, a data entity, a specific
  procedure, a generic interface, a nongeneric module, or a generic
  module.

  Declarations of generic parameters may depend upon other generic
  parameters, but there shall not be a circular dependence between
  them, except by way of pointer or allocatable components of generic
  parameters that are types.

  0.4.1 Generic parameters as types

  If a generic parameter is a type, it shall be declared by a type
  definition having the same syntax as a derived type definition.
  The type definition may include component definitions.  The types
  and type parameters of the components may themselves be specified
  by other generic parameters.  The type definition may include
  type-bound procedures.  Characteristics of these type-bound
  procedures may depend upon generic parameters.

  If the generic parameter is a type, the corresponding instance
  parameter shall be a type.  If the generic parameter has components,
  the instance parameter shall at least have components with the same
  names, types, type parameters and ranks.  If the generic parameter
  has type parameters, the instance parameter shall at least have
  type parameters with the same names and attributes.  Type parameters
  of the instance parameter that correspond to type parameters of
  the generic parameter shall be specified by a colon, as though
  they were deferred in an object of the type - even if they are
  KIND parameters, and any others shall have values given by
  initialization expressions.  If the generic parameter has type-bound
  specific procedures or type-bound generics, the corresponding
  instance parameter shall at least have type-bound specifics and
  generics that are consistent, except that if a specific procedure
  binding to the generic parameter has the ABSTRACT attribute the
  instance parameter need not have a specific binding of the same
  name because it is only used to provide an interface for a generic
  binding; it shall not be accessed by the specific name.  Instance
  parameters that are intrinsic types shall be considered to be
  derived types with no accessible components.  Intrinsic operations
  and intrinsic functions are available in every scoping unit, so it
  is not necessary to assume that intrinsic operations and intrinsic
  functions are bound to the type.

  0.4.2 Generic parameters as data objects

  If a generic parameter is a data object, it shall be declared by
  a type declaration statement.  Its type and type parameters may
  be generic parameters.  If it is necessary that the actual
  parameter to be provided when the generic module is instantiated
  shall be an initialization expression, the generic parameter shall
  have the KIND attribute, no matter what its type - even a type
  specified by another generic parameter.

  If the generic parameter is a data object, the corresponding
  instance parameter's type, kind and rank shall be the same as
  specified for the generic parameter.

  If the generic parameter is a data object with the KIND attribute,
  the corresponding instance parameter shall be an initialization
  expression.

  If the generic parameter is a data object without the KIND
  attribute, the corresponding instance parameter shall be a
  variable.  Every expression within the variable shall be an
  initialization expression.  The instance has access to the
  variable by some newly-defined variety of association (or maybe
  by storage association)~--- instantiation does not create a new
  one with the same characteristics.

  0.4.3 Generic parameters as procedures or generic interfaces

  If a generic parameter is a procedure or a generic interface, its
  interface shall be declared explicitly.  Its characteristics may
  depend upon generic parameters.

  If the generic parameter is a procedure, the corresponding instance
  parameter shall be a procedure having characteristics consistent
  with the interface for the generic parameter, which interface may
  depend upon other generic parameters.

  If the generic parameter is a generic interface, the corresponding
  instance parameter shall be a generic identifier, whose interface
  shall have at least specifics consistent with specific interfaces
  within the generic parameter's generic interface.  The instance
  parameter need not have the same generic identifier as the generic
  parameter.  If a specific interface within the generic parameter's
  generic interface has the ABSTRACT attribute, the instance parameter
  need not have a specific procedure with the same name, but it shall
  have a specific procedure with the same characteristics.  In this
  case, the specific procedure within the generic parameter's generic
  interface cannot be accessed by the specified name as a specific
  procedure, either within an instance or from one by use association.

  0.4.4 Generic parameters as generic or nongeneric modules

  If a generic parameter is a generic module, The interface of that
  parameter shall be declared.

  If the generic parameter is a generic module, the corresponding
  instance parameter shall be a generic module, having an interface
  consistent with the generic parameter.

  If the generic parameter is a nongeneric module, the corresponding
  instance parameter shall be a nongeneric module, which may be an
  internal module or an instance of a generic module.

  0.5 Instantiation of a generic module and use of the instance - fine
      points

  If a generic module is defined within a module, it can have the
  PRIVATE attribute.  This means it cannot be accessed by use
  association, which in turn means that it cannot be instantiated
  outside of the module where it is defined.  Rather, it will be
  instantiated some fixed number of times within that module, which
  instances might or might not be accessible by use association.
  A similar situation holds, of course, if a generic module is defined
  within a scoping unit that is not a module.

  If the generic module is an internal generic module, it shall be
  accessible in the scoping unit where the USE statement that
  instantiates it appears.  This may require that it be made available
  by USE association from a module within which it is defined.  That
  is, two USE statements may be necessary:  One to access the generic
  module, and another to instantiate it.

  If a generic module has a generic parameter that is a generic
  module, and the generic parameter is public, four USE statements
  might appear:  One to access the generic module, one to instantiate
  it, one to access the generic parameter that is a generic module
  from that instance, and yet another to instantiate that generic
  module.  This could be prohibited, for example by prohibiting
  generic parameters that are generic modules to be public, but why?

  An instance parameter is accessible by use association from an
  instance of a generic module by using the identifier of the
  corresponding generic parameter, unless the generic parameter's
  dentifier is private.

  Where a module is instantiated, the <only> and <renaming>
  facilities of the USE statement can be used as well.  Processors
  could exploit an <only-list> to avoid instantiating all of a module
  if only part of it is ultimately used.  Suppose for example that
  one has a generic BLAS module from which one wants only a double
  precision L2-norm routine.  One might write

    USE BLAS(kind(0.0d0)), only: DNRM2 = GNRM2

  where GNRM2 is the specific name of the L2-norm routine in the
  generic module, and DNRM2 is the local name of the double
  precision instance of it created by instantiating the module.  If
  <only> is not used, every entity in the module is instantiated,
  and all public entities are accessed from the instance by use
  association, exactly as is currently done for a USE statement
  without an <only-list>.

  If a named instance is created, access to it need not be in the
  same scoping unit as the instantiation; it is only necessary that
  the name of the instance be accessible.  Indeed, the instance might
  be created in one module, its name accessed from that module by
  use association, and entities from it finally accessed by use
  association by way of that accessed name.

  0.6 Examples of proposed syntax for definition

  The following subsections illustrate how to define modules.

  0.6.1 Sort module hoping for < routine

  Here's an example of the beginning of a generic sort module in
  which the processor can't check that there's an accessible <
  operator with an appropriate interface until the generic module
  is instantiated.  There's no requirement on the parameters of the
  generic type "MyType".  The only way the instance can get the <
  routine is if it is intrinsic, by host association from the scoping
  unit where the generic module is defined, or if it is bound to the
  type given by the instance parameter (recall that instances do not
  access by host association the scoping unit where they're
  instantiated).  Aleks advocates that this one is illegal.  The
  primary difference would be in the quality of message announced in
  the event "MyType" does not have a suitable < operator.

    module Sorting ( MyType )
      type :: MyType
      end type MyType
      ....

  0.6.2 Sort module with < specified by module parameter generic
        interface

  The < operator is given by a generic parameter.  When the module is
  instantiated, a generic identifier for an interface with a specific
  consistent with the LESS shown here, shall be provided as an
  instance parameter.

    module SortingP ( MyType, Operator(<) )
      type :: MyType
      end type MyType
      interface operator (<)
        pure logical abstract function Less ( A, B )
        ! "less" is purely an abstraction
          type(myType), intent(in) :: A, B
        end function Less
      end interface
      ....

  The ABSTRACT attribute for the LESS function means that the
  associated instance parameter for OPERATOR(<) only needs to have a
  specific with the specified interface, but the name isn't required
  to be LESS.  Indeed, LESS can't be accessed by that name within
  "SortingP" or by use association from an instance of "SortingP".

  The instance parameter corresponding to OPERATOR(<) need not have
  the same generic identifier.  For example, if it's OPERATOR(>)
  (with the obvious semantics), the instantiated sort routine would
  sort into reverse order.

  0.6.3 Sort module with < specified by type-bound generic interface

  This illustrates a generic parameter that is a type that is required
  to have a particular type-bound generic.  The type shall have a
  type-bound generic with a particular interface, but if entities are
  declared by reference to the name "MyType" or a local name for it
  after it is accessed from an instance, the specific type-bound
  procedure cannot be invoked by name; it can only be accessed by way
  of the type-bound generic. The ABSTRACT attribute does this.  It's
  only allowed in the definitions of types that are generic
  parameters.

    module SortingTBP ( MyType )
      type :: MyType
      contains
      procedure(less), abstract :: Less
      ! Can't do "foobar%less".
      ! "Less" is only a handle for the interface for the
      ! "operator(<)" generic
        generic operator(<) => Less
        ! Type shall have this generic operator
      end type MyType
      ! Same explicit interface for "less" as in previous example
    ....

  0.6.4 Module with type having at least a specified component

    module LinkedLists ( MyType )
      type :: MyType
        type(myType), pointer :: Next! "next" component is required.
        ! Type is allowed to have other components, and TBPs.
      end type MyType
      ....

  0.6.5 Module with type having separately-specified kind parameter

    module LinkedLists ( MyType, ItsKind )
      type :: MyType(itsKind)
        integer, kind :: itsKind
      end type MyType
      integer, kind :: ItsKind
    ....

  0.6.6 BLAS definition used in instantiation examples in 8.7

    module BLAS ( KIND )
      integer, kind :: KIND
      interface NRM2; module procedure GNRM2; end interface NRM2
      ....
    contains
      pure real(kind) function GNRM2 ( Vec )
      ....

  0.6.7 Ordinary module with private instance count and internal
        generic module

    module ModuleWithInternalGeneric
      integer, private :: HowManyInstances
      module InternalGeneric ( MyType )
        ! Instances of InternalGeneric access HowManyInstances
        ! by host association
      ....

  0.7 Examples of proposed syntax for instantiation

  The following subsections illustrate how to instantiate a generic
  module.

  0.7.1 Instantiating a stand-alone generic module

  Instantiate a generic module BLAS with KIND(0.0d0) and access every
  public entity from the instance:

    use BLAS(kind(0.0d0))

  Instantiate a generic module BLAS with KIND(0.0d0) and access only
  the GNRM2 function from the instance:

    use BLAS(kind(0.0d0)), only: GNRM2

  Instantiate a generic module BLAS with KIND(0.0d0) and access only
  the GNRM2 function from the instance, with local name DNRM2:

    use BLAS(kind(0.0d0)), only: DNRM2 => GNRM2

  0.7.2 Instantiate within a module, and then use from that module

  This is the way to get only one single-precision and only one
  double precision instance of BLAS; instantiating them wherever
  they are needed results in multiple instances.  This also
  illustrates two ways to make generic interfaces using specific
  procedures in generic modules.  The first one creates the generic
  interface from specific procedures accessed from the instances:

    module DBLAS
      use BLAS(kind(0.0d0))
    end module DBLAS
    module SBLAS
      use BLAS(kind(0.0e0))
    end module SBLAS
    module B
      use DBLAS, only: DNRM2 => GNRM2
      use SBLAS, only: SNRM2 => GNRM2
      interface NRM2
        module procedure DNRM2, SNRM2
      end interface
    end module B

  In the second one the generic module has the generic interface
  named NRM2 that includes the GNRM2 specific:

    module DBLAS
      use BLAS(kind(0.0d0))
    end module DBLAS
    module SBLAS
      use BLAS(kind(0.0e0))
    end module SBLAS
    module B
      use DBLAS, only: NRM2    ! Generic; GNRM2 specific not accessed
      use SBLAS, only: NRM2, & ! Generic
        &    SNRM2 => GNRM2    ! Specific
    end module B

  0.7.3 Instantiate and access twice in one scoping unit, augmenting
        generic interface

    module B
      use BLAS(kind(0.0d0)), only: NRM2
      ! Generic; GNRM2 specific not accessed
       use BLAS(kind(0.0e0)), only: NRM2, & ! Generic NRM2 grows here
         &                SNRM2 => GNRM2    ! Specific
    end module B

  The method in 8.7.2 above might be desirable so as not accidentally
  to have multiple identical instances of BLAS in different scoping
  units.

  0.7.4 Instantiate and give the instance a name, then access from it

    ! Instantiate BLAS with kind(0.0d0) and call the instance DBLAS,
    ! which is a local module.
    use :: DBLAS => BLAS(kind(0.0d0))
    ! Access GNRM2 from the instance DBLAS and call it DNRM2 here
    use DBLAS, only: DNRM2 => GNRM2

  0.7.5 Instantiate two named instances in one module, then use one
        elsewhere

    module BlasInstances
      ! Instantiate instances but do not access from them
      ! by use association
      use :: DBLAS => BLAS(kind(0.0d0)), SBLAS => BLAS(kind(0.0d0))
    end module BlasInstances
    module NeedsSBlasNRM2
      use BlasInstances, only: SBLAS
      ! gets the SBLAS instance module, not its contents
      use SBLAS, only: SNRM2 => GNRM2 ! Accesses GNRM2 from SBLAS
    end module  NeedsSBlasNRM2

  0.7.6 Instantiate sort module with generic interface instance
        parameter

    type :: OrderedType
      ...
    end type OrderedType
    interface operator (<)
      pure logical function Less ( A, B )
        type(orderedType), intent(in) :: A, B
      end function Less
    end interface
    ! Notice relaxed statement ordering.
    use SortingP(orderedType,operator(<)), &
        &  only: OrderedTypeQuicksort => Quicksort
    ....

  0.7.7 Instantiate sort module with TBP Less

    use SortingTBP(real(kind(0.0d0))), &
        &  only: DoubleQuicksort => Quicksort

  Notice that this depends on < being a "type-bound generic" that is
  bound to the intrinsic double precision type.  Here's one with a
  user-defined type that has a user-defined type-bound < operator.

    type MyType
      ! My components here
    contains
      procedure :: MyLess => Less
      generic operator ( < ) => myLess
    end type MyType

    use SortingTBP(myType), only: MyTypeQuicksort => Quicksort

  The interface for LESS is given in 0.6.2.

  Notice that the USE statement comes _after_ the type definition
  and the TBP's function definition.

  0.8 Example of consistent type and TBP

  This example illustrates how to create a type with type-and-kind
  consistent type-bound procedures, for any kind.  This cannot
  be guaranteed by using parameterized types.

    module SparseMatrices ( Kind )
      integer, kind :: Kind
      type Matrix
        ! Stuff to find nonzero elements...
        real(kind) :: Element
      contains
        procedure :: FrobeniusNorm
       ....
      end type

    contains
      subroutine FrobeniusNorm ( TheMatrix, TheNorm )
        type(matrix), intent(in) :: TheMatrix
        real(kind), intent(out) :: TheNorm
        ....
      end subroutine FrobeniusNorm
      ....
    end module SparseMatrices

    ....

    use SparseMatrices(selected_real_kind(28,300)), & ! Quad precision
    & only: QuadMatrix_T => Matrix, QuadFrobenius => Frobenius, &
    &       QuadKind => Kind
    ! Access instance parameter by way of generic parameter

    ....

    type(quadMatrix_t) :: QuadMatrix
    real(quadKind) :: TheNorm

    ....

    call quadFrobenius ( quadMatix, theNorm )

History:

  Paper 03-264r1  meeting 166  Submitted
        04-153            167
        04-383r1          170  Accepted as complete

------------------------------------------------------------------

Number: J3-015

Title: Updating complex parts

Submitted By: J3

Status: Specification complete

References: 04-165, 04-384r1

Basic Functionality:

  Provide a syntax that allows to update the real and imaginary
  parts of a complex variable without updating the whole thing

Rationale:

  It's not unusual to need to do this.

Estimated Impact:

  Very minor.  Estimated at meeting 169 to be 4 on the JKR scale.

Detailed Specification:

  Specify that the real and imaginary parts of a complex variable
  can be accessed by using component-like syntax, with "component"
  names REAL and AIMAG.

History:

  Paper 03-258r1  meeting 166  Section 2.2.5
        04-165            167  Submitted
        04-255            167
        04-384r1          255  Accepted as complete

------------------------------------------------------------------

Number: J3-016

Title: Disassociated or deallocated actual argument associated with
       nonpointer nonallocatable optional dummy argument is considered
       not to be present

Submitted By: J3

Status: Specification complete

References: 04-178, 04-385

Basic Functionality:

  A disassociated or deallocated actual argument associated with a
  nonpointer nonallocatable optional dummy argument is considered
  not to be present.

Rationale:

  I have a procedure that has numerous pointers that are associated,
  or not, depending on input parameters.  These are in turn passed
  to some subroutines that do (or do  not do) some computations
  depending on whether the dummy arguments are associated.  This,
  of course, requires the dummy arguments to be pointers, which
  degrades the generality of the procedure, and may have undesirable
  implications for optimization.

  It would be better if I could use optional nonpointer dummy
  arguments to decide whether to do these computations.  In order to
  achieve this effect by using N optional dummy arguments I need an
  IF ... ELSE IF ...  END IF construct with 2**N branches.

Estimated Impact:

  Nearly trivial -- a minor change in definition of "present".
  Estimated at meeting 169 to be 4 on the JKR scale.

Detailed Specification:

  Allow to associate a deallocated allocatable actual argument, or a
  disassociated pointer actual argument, with an optional nonpointer
  nonallocatable dummy argument, in which case the dummy argument is
  considered to be absent.  In Fortran 2003, this is an error.

History:

  Paper 03-258r1  meeting 166  Section 2.4.3.1
        04-178            167  Submitted
        04-385            170  Accepted as complete

------------------------------------------------------------------

Number: J3-017

Title: Default initial values for absent optional dummy arguments

Submitted By: J3

Status: Specification complete

References: 04-179, 04-386r2

Basic Functionality:

 Default initial values for absent optional dummy arguments

Rationale:

  A frequently requested feature is to be able to specify a default
  initial value for absent optional dummy arguments.

Estimated Impact:

  Minor; most changes are in Section 12.  Estimated at J3 meeting
  169 to be at 4 on the JKR scale.

Detailed Specification:

  Provide a specification for a default initial value for an absent
  optional dummy scalar, or dummy array that is not an assumed-size
  array.   The specification has exactly the same syntax as an
  initialization, but with a constraint that the expression shall
  be a restricted expression rather than an initialization
  expression.  (The restrictions on specification expressions at
  [04-007:126:7-19] would need to be applied to restricted
  expressions in general instead of just to specification
  expressions.)

  If an optional dummy argument has a default initialization
  specified and the associated actual argument is absent, the
  initializer is evaluated on entry to the procedure, and then
  becomes associated with the dummy argument.  The VALUE
  attribute may be specified as well. Optional dummy arguments
  with initializers cannot have INTENT(INOUT) or INTENT(OUT).

  For an optional dummy argument that has default initialization:

  (1) Its assumed nonkind type parameters and extents, and dynamic
      type if it is polymorphic, are taken from the initializer.
  (2) If it is not a pointer the value is assigned as if by intrinsic
      assignment.
  (3) If it is allocatable, it is assumed to be unallocated before
      initialization.
  (4) If it is a pointer, the default initializer shall have the
      POINTER or TARGET attribute, and the association is established
      as if by pointer assignment.

History:

  Paper 03-258r1  meeting 166  Section 2.4.3.2
        04-179            167  Submitted
        04-386r2          170  Accepted as complete

------------------------------------------------------------------

Number: J3-018

Title: Non-null initial targets for pointers

Submitted By: J3

Status: Specification complete

References: 04-202, 04-387r1

Basic Functionality:

  Allow initial targets for pointers that are other than NULL().

Rationale:

  It would be useful to be able to initialize pointers to targets
  other than NULL().  This is especially true for procedure
  pointers.

Estimated Impact:

  Minor.  It was estimated to be at 3 on the JKR scale at meeting
  169, but it is now clear that the project is a bit more
  complicated than originally envisioned.  It was judged at J3
  meeting 170 to be at 4 on the JKR scale.

Detailed Specification:

  Allow the initial target for a data pointer to be an accessible
  nonpointer nonallocatable variable with the SAVE attribute.
  Every expression within the variable shall be an initialization
  expression.

  Allow the initial target for a procedure pointer to be an
  accessible external or module procedure, or an intrinsic procedure
  listed in subclause 13.6 and not marked with a bullet (or the
  result of resolving a generic without invoking a procedure if the
  proposal in 04-391 succeeds).

  The initial target shall satisfy all the requirements for pointer
  assignment (e.g. the TARGET attribute, type conformance, etc.).

  This feature shall be available both for named pointers and for
  pointer components.  Pointer components may be default initialized
  to have an initial target.

  The target may be accessed by use or host association.  If it is
  declared in the same scoping unit it need not have been previously
  declared; this facilitates initialization to a "sentinel" object.
  (See note 4.36 1/2 in section 8.1 in 04-387.)

History:

  Paper 03-258r1  meeting 166  Section 2.12.2
        04-202            167  Submitted
        04-351            169
        04-387r1          170  Accepted as complete

------------------------------------------------------------------

Number: J3-019

Title: More mathematical functions

Submitted By: J3

Status: Specification complete

References: 04-184, 04-388r1

Basic Functionality:

  More mathematical functions.

Rationale:

  Mathematical functions for complex type are occasionally needed.
  The only ones that are available for complex type are ABS, COS,
  EXP, LOG, and SIN. The other mathematical functions that are
  provided for real type are useful in practice for complex type
  as well.  Inverse hyperbolic functions and other functions are
  useful.  Simple identities for complex argument exist, but it
  is a burden to expect users to look them up, and processors
  might be able to produce more efficient implementations.  For
  inverse hyperbolic functions, there are simple identities
  involving square root and logarithm, but these can have
  substantial cancellation error for some ranges of values, so
  it is important to be careful in their implementation.
  Processors would presumably include careful intrinsic
  implementations of these functions.

Estimated Impact:

  Minor but tedious.  Estimated at meeting 169 to be 4 on the
  JKR scale.

Detailed Specification:

  Provide ACOS, ASIN, ATAN, COSH, SINH, TAN and TANH for complex
  type.  Provide inverse hyperbolic functions, including for
  complex type.  In the case of TAN, specify that the real part
  of the argument is regarded as a value in radians.

History:

  Paper 03-258r1  meeting 166  Section 2.4.4.3
        04-184r1          167  Submitted
        04-388r1          170  Accepted as complete
------------------------------------------------------------------

Number: J3-020

Title: Allow TYPE ( <intrinsic-type-spec> )

Submitted By: J3

Status: Specification complete

References: 04-161, 04-389r1

Basic Functionality:

  Allow TYPE ( <intrinsic-type-spec> ).

Rationale:

  For regularity and symmetry, allow TYPE ( <intrinsic-type-spec> ).

Estimated Impact:

  Trivial.  Estimated at meeting 169 to be at 3 on the JKR scale.

Detailed Specification:

  Allow TYPE ( <intrinsic-type-spec> ) to declare entities of
  intrinsic type.

History:

  Paper 03-258r1  meeting 166  Section 2.2.1
        04-161            167  Submitted
        04-389r1          170  Accepted as complete

------------------------------------------------------------------

Number: J3-021

Title: Resolve generic without invoking a procedure or evaluating
       arguments

Submitted By: J3

Status: Specification complete

References: 04-273, 04-391r1

Basic Functionality:

  Given examplars of actual arguments, resolve a generic name to
  a specific procedure without invoking the procedure or evaluating
  its arguments.

Rationale:

  With care and diligence, one can develop a program so that
  related sets of variables, constants and function results are
  parameterized by a single kind type parameter.  In order to change
  the kind of that set of entities, one need only change one named
  constant's definition - almost:  Generic procedures cannot be
  actual arguments or procedure pointer targets.  Thus, if one needs
  to change the program, in addition to changing the single named
  constant definition, one needs to find all places where a specific
  procedure that operates on the entities in question is an actual
  argument or procedure pointer target, and manually edit those
  appearances.

  It would be helpful to have a facility to resolve a generic name
  to a specific procedure without evaluating any arguments or
  invoking a procedure.

Estimated Impact:

  Minor.  Processors already know how to do generic resolution.
  Estimated at meeting 169 to be at 4 on the JKR scale.

Detailed Specification:

  Given examplars of actual arguments, resolve a generic name to a
  specific procedure without invoking the procedure or evaluating
  its arguments.

  There are at least two ways to do this.  One is to provide a
  syntax that is suggestive of procedure reference, but does
  resolution instead.  One possibility for this is to enclose an
  actual argument list in square brackets or curly brackets
  instead of round brackets.  E.g.,

    call solver ( myVec, myJacobian, myModel[myVec,myJacobian] )

  Another is to provide an entity that looks like an intrinsic
  function but that has the important distinction that its
  arguments aren't evaluated.  Indeed, this entity that has the
  appearance of a function reference isn't even invoked during
  program execution.  It is entirely resolved to a procedure by
  the processor during translation.  E.g.,

call solver ( myVec, myJacobian, resolve(myModel,myVec,myJacobian) )

  RESOLVE would be a an inquiry "function" that takes a
  <generic-spec> as its first "argument," and doesn't evaluate
  its other arguments - because it's an inquiry function.

  It should be possible to resolve a type-bound generic
  reference, e.g., RESOLVE(A%B).

  No matter what syntax is used, it should be allowed to use
  the result either as an actual argument or a procedure pointer
  target.

History:

  Paper 04-273    meeting 168  Submitted
        04-391r1          170  Accepted as complete

------------------------------------------------------------------

Number: J3-022

Title: Allow a polymorphic allocatable variable in intrinsic
       assignment

Submitted By: J3

Status: Specification complete

References: 04-354r1, 04-392

Basic Functionality:

  Allow a polymorphic allocatable variable in intrinsic assignment.

Rationale:

  We allow intrinsic assignment to change the extent or length type
  parameters of an allocatable variable in an assignment.  Why not
  the type if it's also polymorphic?  Surely that would be equally
  valuable.  After all, it can be done with a DEALLOCATE statement
  followed by an ALLOCATE statement with a SOURCE= specifier.  Why
  not allow the clearer intrinsic assignment statement?

Estimated Impact:

  Trivial for the standard, probably in the trivial-to-small range
  for processors.  Estimated at meeting 169 to be at 4 on the JKR
  scale.

Detailed Specification:

  Allow a polymorphic allocatable variable in intrinsic assignment.
  Require <expr> to have the same rank as a polymorphic <variable>.
  If <variable> is allocated and polymorphic, deallocate it (as we
  do now if any bounds or length type parameters differ).  Then
  allocate it with the same dynamic type, type parameters and bounds
  as <expr>.  Or, we could say "if the dynamic type of <variable> is
  different from the dynamic type of <expr>, deallocate <variable>".
  It is necessary to specify which one because if we do the first,
  processors could not choose to do the second as a polite
  optimization without making finalization indeterminate.  There
  could be a middle ground that mumbles about finalizers.

History:

  Paper 04-354r1  meeting 169  Submitted
        04-392            170  Accepted as complete

------------------------------------------------------------------

Number: J3-023

Title: Named rank-one array constant's extent from its
       <initialization-expr>.

Submitted By: J3

Status: Specification complete

References: 01-180, 04-101, 04-394r1

Basic Functionality:

  As with the length of a character named constant, allow a
  rank-one array named constant to get its extent from the
  <initialization-expr>.

Rationale:

  There was a good reason that a provision was made for named
  constants of character type to get their lengths from their
  <initialization-expr>s.  For the same reason, it would be
  useful if a rank-one array named constant could get its extent
  from its <initialization-expr>.

Estimated Impact:

  Small effect in 5.1.2.5.2, or maybe a short new subclause in
  5.1.2.5, to explain how an array named constant gets its extent
  from its <initialization-expr> (see item (2) in the list at the
  end of 4.4.4).

  Estimated at meeting 169 to be at 3 on the JKR scale.

Detailed Specification:

  Allow a rank-one array named constant to get its extent from
  the extent of its <initialization-expr>.  Use <assumed-shape-spec>
  for the dimension specification.

  See 01-180 for an example.

History:

  Paper 01-180    meeting 156
        04-101            167  Submitted
        04-394r1          170  Accepted as complete

------------------------------------------------------------------

Number: J3-024

Title: EXIT from any labeled construct

Submitted By: J3

Status: Specification complete

References: 04-156, 04-395r1

Basic Functionality:

  Allow EXIT from any labeled construct.

Rationale:

  Some algorithms cannot be expressed in Fortran 2003 without GOTO
  statements or extra tests, but they could be expressed with EXIT
  if it could be applied to any labeled construct.  For example,
  here's a routine that says "call R if X is not an element of the
  set S, which is represented by elements of A(1:NUM\_IN\_SET)".

  With an extra test:

     do i = 1, num_in_set
       if ( x == a(i) ) exit
     end do ! i
     if ( i > num_in_set ) call r

  or, with GOTO:

     do i = 1, num_in_set
       if ( x == a(i) ) go to 10
     end do ! i
     go to 20
  10 call r
  20 continue

  or, with a more general EXIT:

  o: if ( .true. ) then
       do i = 1, num_in_set
         if ( x == a(i) ) exit o
       end do ! i
       call r
     end if o

Estimated Impact:

  Trivial to minor -- a few lines in 8.1.6.4.4.  Estimated at
  meeting 169 to be at 3 on the JKR scale.

Detailed Specification:

  Allow an EXIT statement with a <do-construct-name> that is the
  same as the name of any enclosing construct, not just a DO
  construct.  When the EXIT statement is executed, execution of
  the named construct is terminated.  For compatibility, an EXIT
  statement without a <do-construct-name> continues to refer to
  the nearest enclosing DO construct.

History:

  Paper 03-258r1  meeting 166  Section 2.1.2
        04-109            167
        04-156r1          167  Submitted
        04-395r1          170  Accepted as complete

------------------------------------------------------------------

Number: J3-025

Title: Allow SUBROUTINE <name> or FUNCTION <name> to be optional
       on END statements for module and internal subprograms

Submitted By: J3

Status: Specification complete

References: 04-177, 04-396r1

Basic Functionality:

  Allow SUBROUTINE <name> or FUNCTION <name> to be optional on END
  statements for module and internal subprograms.

Rationale:

  Module procedures are required to end with END SUBROUTINE <name>
  or END FUNCTION <name>.  This is generally a good thing, but it
  makes it impossible to convert a Fortran 77 external procedure to
  a module procedure by using INCLUDE.

Estimated Impact:

  Trivial.  Estimated at meeting 169 to be at 3 on the JKR scale.

Detailed Specification:

  To cater for the desire that a Fortran 77 external procedure could
  be made into a module procedure using INCLUDE, allow the SUBROUTINE
  <name> or FUNCTION <name> part to be optional on an <end-subroutine>
  or <end-function> statement.  For consistency, allow them to be
  optional for internal subprograms as well.

History:

  Paper 03-258r1  meeting 166  Section 2.4.2
        04-177            167  Submitted
        04-396r1          170  Accepted as complete

------------------------------------------------------------------

Number: J3-026

Title: ATAN with two arguments works like ATAN2

Submitted By: J3

Status: Specification complete

References: 04-183, 04-397

Basic Functionality:

  Define an alternative ATAN that works like ATAN2.

Rationale:

  ATAN is generic.  It is surprising to students that they need
  to use ATAN2 just because they have the two-argument formulation.

Estimated Impact:

  Minor:  One more description for an existing intrinsic function -
  and we already have the description.  Estimated at meeting 169 to
  be at 3 on the JKR scale.

Detailed Specification:

  Provide a specification for how ATAN works with two arguments,
  based on how ATAN2 works.

History:

  Paper 03-258r1  meeting 166  Section 2.4.4.2
        04-183            167  Submitted
        04-397            170  Accepted as complete

------------------------------------------------------------------

Number: J3-027

Title: ASCII arguments for LGE etc

Submitted By: J3

Status: Specification complete

References: 04-185, 04-398

Basic Functionality:

  Allow ASCII arguments for LGE etc.

Rationale:

  Now that ASCII kind characters are required by the standard, it is
  nothing short of bizarre that the four functions to compare
  character strings according to the ASCII collating sequence, viz.
  LGE, LGT, LLE and LLT, do not permit arguments of ASCII kind.

  If one has a program with some character variables of default kind
  that are compared by using these functions, and their kind needs to
  be changed to ASCII, one has to find the invocations of these
  functions and replace them by the equivalent relational operators.
  This is an unnecessary maintenance expense.

Estimated Impact:

  Trivial.  Estimated at meeting 169 to be at 3 on the JKR scale.

Detailed Specification:

  Allow ASCII kind arguments for LGE, LGT, LLE and LLT.

History:

  Paper 03-258r1  meeting 166  Section 2.4.4.5, 04-185
        04-185            167  Submitted
        04-398            170  Accepted as complete

------------------------------------------------------------------

Number: J3-028

Title: Allow forward type for allocatable components

Submitted by: J3

Status: Specification complete

References: Pub-116, 04-226, 04-399

Basic Functionality:

  Do not require the type of an allocatable component to be defined
  before the type containing the allocatable component.

Rationale:

  Mutually recursive types can be related by components having
  the POINTER attribute, which allows the types of the components
  to be defined after the type definition in which the components
  appear.  Some mutually recursive types could be related by
  components having the ALLOCATABLE attribute, except that is
  presently prohibited.  ALLOCATABLE is preferable to POINTER
  whenever possible.  We should make every effort to make
  ALLOCATABLE as widely usable as possible.

Estimated Impact:

  Easy to implement, improves performance, trivial change in the
  standard.  Estimated at meeting 169 to be at 3 on the JKR scale.

Detailed Specification:

  Do not require the type of an allocatable component to be defined
  before the type containing the allocatable component.

  The following suggested edits illustrate the magnitude of the
  proposal:

    In Constraint 438, replace "the POINTER attribute is not" by
    "neither the POINTER nor ALLOCATABLE attribute is" and delete
    "shall be CLASS(*) or" (Constraint 437 requires either the
    POINTER or ALLOCATABLE attribute for a component declared with
    the CLASS keyword).

    In Constraint 439, insert "or ALLOCATABLE" after "POINTER".

History:

  Paper 04-226    meeting 167  Submitted as Pub-116
        04-399            170  Accepted as complete

------------------------------------------------------------------

Number: J3-029

Title: More information about GET_COMMAND[_ARGUMENT] failure

Submitted By: J3

Status: Specification complete

References: 04-352, 04-400

Basic Functionality:

  Provide more information if GET_COMMAND or GET_COMMAND_ARGUMENT
  fails.

Rationale:

  It would be useful to know more precisely why GET_COMMAND or
  GET_COMMAND_ARGUMENT fails.

Estimated Impact:

  Trivial for standard, probably trivial-to-small for processors.
  Estimated at meeting 169 to be at 3 on the JKR scale.

Detailed Specification:

  Set the STATUS argument of GET_COMMAND to -2 if the processor
  does not support the concept of a command line.

  Set the STATUS argument of GET_COMMAND_ARGUMENT to -2 if the
  value of the NUMBER argument is negative or more than the number
  of command arguments.

History:

  Paper 04-352    meeting 169  Submitted
        04-400            170  Accepted as complete

------------------------------------------------------------------

Number: J3-030

Title: Simplified means to select the most commonly desired real
       and integer kinds

Submitted By: J3

Status: Specification complete

References: 04-240, 04-407r1

Basic Functionality:

  Provide a simplified means to select the most commonly desired
  real and integer kinds.

Rationale:

  Several possible approaches were outlined in 04-240.  I propose
  that we adopt the approach that is intermediate in complexity,
  namely that the standard define named constants for the most
  commonly desired real and integer kinds.

  The approach of standardizing some named constants seems
  adequately simple without being restrictive or raising
  compatibility issues.  It also has the advantage of being
  completely trivial to implement.

  My proposal is restricted to kinds with exact sizes. Adding
  too many options would increase the complexity of the choice
  to be made by users and would result in issues of interoperability
  of codes where different users made different choices of how
  to specify the kinds. Note that the existing selected_*_kind
  intrinsics provide the capability of specifying minimum
  requirements and could be extended in many ways (although
  that is not proposed here).  Exact sizes are the simplest
  and most commonly requested requirement, and one that the
  standard currently provides no facility for (except in C
  interop, which has it only for integers - nor for reals).

  I also restrict the proposal to integers and reals because
  they are the common cases.  User specification of specific
  sizes for logical kinds is rare (and even more rare when you
  rule out the cases where logical is being used as a synonym
  for unsigned integer, which is a nonstandard and nonportable
  practice anyway).  User specification of character kinds is
  also rare.

Estimated Impact:

  3 on the JKR scale.

Detailed Specification:

  The standard will specify the names of several named constants
  in the ISO_FORTRAN_ENV intrinsic module. These named constants
  will have kind values for the representations described below.

  Named constants provided will be for the kinds of integers whose
  storage sizes are exactly 8, 16, 32, and 64 bits, and for the
  kinds of reals whose storage sizes are exactly 32, 64, and 128 bits.
  Additionally, named constants will be provided for the kinds of
  default integer, default real, and double precision real.

  If the processor supports more than one representation with the
  specified size, it is processor-dependent which of those
  representations the named constant corresponds to.

  If the processsor does not support a particular representation,
  the value of the corresponding named constant will be one of
  two negative values specified by the standard.  If the processor
  does not support a representation with the exact size requested
  or with any larger size, the value shall be -1.  If the processor
  does not support a representation with the exact size requested,
  but does support a representation with a larger size, the value
  shall be -2.

  This proposal does not require the compiler to support any
  particular kind. Nor does this proposal specify the kind values,
  which remain processor-dependent.

  This syntax suggestion is purely illustrative for now:

   int8_kind, int16_kind, int32_kind, int64_kind
   real32_kind, real64_kind, real128_kind
   int_default_kind, real_default_kind, real_double_kind

History:

  Paper 04-240    meeting 167  Submitted
        04-407r1          170  Accepted as complete

------------------------------------------------------------------

Number: J3-031

Title: ANDTHEN and ORELSE pseudo-functions

Submitted By: J3

Status: Specification complete

References: 04-193, 04-410r1

Basic Functionality:

  Guarantee short-circuit evaluation of AND and OR operations.

Rationale:

  There has been considerable e-mail discussion of a way to perform
  short-circuiting of tests, usually to allow writing things simply
  and to avoid common user errors.  Various forms of an .ANDTHEN.
  operator have been proposed.   A canonical example is

       I > 0 .AND. I < 10 .ANDTHEN. A(I) /= 0

  the .ANDTHEN. guarantees that A(I) won't be referenced if I is out
  of range.  Paper 04-390 provides more rational.

  Much of the discussion has centered on the priority of the new
  operators.   Should they be:  highest, lowest, the same or
  different, or the same as .AND. and .OR.?  Reasonably compelling
  arguments have been made for all of the possibilities.  This
  proposal replaces the operators with functions and thus resolves
  the priority issue.

  The functions are called pseudo-functions to emphasize that they
  are different from normal functions.  An alternate name could be
  "selector functions".  They can be used anyplace that an ordinary
  function can be used, including in declarations, if they follow
  whatever normal rules apply to that use.

  The functionality guarantees that the argument expressions will be
  evaluated in the listed order, left to right, one at a time, and
  that argument evaluation will stop when the function result can
  be determined, and that exceptions and side effects won't occur
  for un-required evaluations.  They effectively require
  short-circuiting.

Estimated Impact:

  4 on the JKR scale.

Detailed Specification:

  Add two new elemental pseudo-functions

    ANDTHEN (A1 ,A2 [, A3, ...AN] )
    ORELSE  (A1 ,A2 [, A3, ...AN] )

    Arguments:
    A1, ...AN       Logical, of any kind, they must be conformable

  The arguments are evaluated in sequence, left to right, one at a
  time.  Evaluation of the arguments stops when ANDTHEN encounters a
  FALSE value, ORELSE encounters a TRUE value, or when the last
  argument has been evaluated.  The result of the function is the
  value of the last argument actually evaluated.  (This is equivalent
  to the AND or OR, respectively, of all of the evaluated arguments.)

  Entities in arguments which are not evaluated need not be defined,
  present, allocated, evaluatable, etc, nor may the processor generate
  any side-effects or exceptions from these arguments.  Note that for
  elemental usage, different result elements will usually evaluate
  different sets of arguments.

  Examples:

    IF ( ANDTHEN(I > 0, I<10, A(I) > 0 ) ) A(I) = log(A(I))

    WHERE ( ANDTHEN( X > 0.0, log(X) < Tol) ) ...

    IF ( ANDTHEN( PRESENT(X), X==0) )  Print *, "X must not be zero!"

  The function can be usefully combined with the "IF" function from
  paper 04-357r1

    Local_value = IF ( ANDTHEN ( present(X), X /= 0.0), X, 1.0) )

    REAL :: Temp ( IF ( ANDTHEN (present(x), size(x)>100), size(x), &
                                                         & 100) )

History:

J3/04-390, 04-193, 04-357R1
  Paper 04-193    meeting 167  Submitted
        04-390            170
        04-410r1          170  Accepted as complete

------------------------------------------------------------------
