
                                                     J3/05-149r1

To:      J3
From:    Bill Long/HPC
Subject: Sequence Pointers and dummy arguments.
Date:    8-Feb-2005


Number:

Title: sequence pointers

Submitted By: J3

Status: For Consideration

References: J3/04-132

Basic Functionality:
--------------------

Provide a method to indicate that the target of a pointer or an actual
argument is contiguous.

Rationale:
----------

Many unnecessary operations happen because compilers cannot determine
that a data item occupies contiguous memory.  For example, contiguous
memory is needed to pass an array to a procedure with an implicit
interface. Certain optimizations are possible if the compiler knows
that the memory stride for the left-most subscript is 1, or if a whole
array occupies a contiguous memory block. Thus, the mere use of
pointers often results in substantially suboptimal code.  If the
compiler knew that the pointer was constrained to point to contiguous
memory, very much better code could be generated. Similar optimization
problems exist for assumed-shape dummy arguments.

Estimated Impact: the effort was estimated as 5 on the John Reid scale at M167.
-----------------

Detailed Specification:
-----------------------

Provide a declaration attribute, SEQUENCE, that specifies that the
pointer being declared will only be associated with a target occupying
a storage sequence or that an assumed-shape dummy argument is
associated with a contiguous actual argument.  For example,

	real, pointer, sequence        :: sptr(:)
        real, sequence, dimension(:,:) :: d

If the variable is a dummy argument with the pointer attribute, the
target of the associated actual argument shall be a storage
sequence. If the variable is an assumed-shape array, the associated
actual argument shall be a storage sequence or a pointer associated
with a target that is a storage sequence.

A corresponding SEQUENCE :: <object-name-list> statement is also
provided.

The attribute could be spelled CONTIGUOUS instead of SEQUENCE.

History: J3/04-132
