
                                                      J3/05-137

Date:    21 Jan 2005
To:      J3
From:    Rob James
Subject: Unlimited polymorphic pointers in common blocks

NUMBER: 
TITLE: Unlimited polymorphic pointers in common blocks
KEYWORDS: Unlimited polymorphic pointer, common block
DEFECT TYPE: 
STATUS: J3 consideration in progress

QUESTION:

Consider the following program:

      PROGRAM foo
        COMMON /blk1/ x
        CLASS(*), POINTER :: x
        CALL sub
      END PROGRAM

      SUBROUTINE sub
        COMMON /blk1/ x
        CLASS(*), POINTER :: x
      END SUBROUTINE

There appears to be nothing prohibiting an unlimited polymorphic
pointer from appearing in a common block, but the following appears in
Fortran 2003 at [100:10]:
    A data pointer shall be storage associated only with data pointers
    of the same type and rank.

And at [75:23-25]:
    An object declared with the CLASS(*) specifier is an unlimited
    polymorphic object.  An unlimited polymorphic entity is not
    declared to have a type.  It is not considered to have the same
    declared type as any other entity, including another unlimited
    polymorphic entity.

It appears that it is not standard conforming to have an unlimited
polymorphic pointer that is storage associated with anything else,
including another unlimited polymorphic pointer.  So, while it is
apparently standard-conforming to have an unlimited polymorphic
pointer in a common block, a common block with the same name cannot be
accessed in any other scoping unit.

This interpretation also seems to be supported by parts of section 16
of the standard.

At [416:7-24]:
    In a storage association context
    ...
      (8) A pointer occupies a single unspecified storage unit that is
          different from that of any nonpointer object and is
          different for each combination of type, type parameters, and
          rank.

At [417:12-13]:
    All scoping units that access named common blocks with the same
    name shall specify an identical sequence of storage units.

And at [417:14-17]:
    For any two blank common blocks, the initial sequence of storage
    units of the longer blank common block shall be identical to the
    sequence of storage units of the shorter common block.  If two
    blank common blocks are the same length, they shall have the same
    sequence of storage units.

Was it intended that an unlimited polymorphic pointer should be
allowed in a common block?  If yes, then was it intended that such a
common block should be accessible in more than one scoping unit?

ANSWER:

No.  An edit is provided to correct this oversight.

EDITS:

All edits refer to 04-007.

[98:20]  Before "an allocatable variable", insert 
         "a polymorphic pointer,".

SUBMITTED BY: Rob James

HISTORY: J3/05-137   m171 Submitted
