
                                                 J3/05-151

Date:    31 Jan 2005
To:      J3
From:    John Reid
Subject: Interpretation request re C_PTR and C_FUNPTR

NUMBER: F03/00xx
TITLE: The BIND attribute for C_PTR and C_FUNPTR
KEYWORDS: BIND attribute, C_PTR, C_FUNPTR, private components
DEFECT TYPE: Erratum
STATUS: J3 consideration in progress

QUESTION: 

1. Do the derived types C_PTR and C_FUNPTR have the BIND 
attribute? 

This affects whether an object of one of these types is permitted 
directly in COMMON.  C589, p. 98 states "If a common-block-object is 
of a derived type, it shall be a sequence type (4.5.1) or a
type with the BIND attribute and it shall have no default 
initialization."

It also affects whether the types are extensible. 4.5.6 states 
"A nonsequence derived type that does not have the BIND attribute is
an extensible type."

2. 15.2.2 states that C_PTR and C_FUNPTR are derived types with
private components. Are user-defined derived types with the BIND 
attribute permitted to have private components?


ANSWER:

1. Yes, it was intended that these types have the BIND attribute. 
An edit makes this clear. 
 
2. A user-defined derived type with the BIND attribute is permitted 
to have private components.

DISCUSSION:

1. It was intended that the behaviour of these types be similar to 
that of user-declared derived types in all respects except that 
they interoperate with C pointer types rather than C struct types.  
As well as the two cases cited in the question, there are special
conditions in a pointer assignment statement (7.4.2) if either the
pointer or the target has the BIND attribute. Also, there is a 
restriction on types with the BIND attribute in a SELECT TYPE
statement (8.1.5). 

2. The rules for the interoperability of a C struct type with a 
Fortran derived type are less restrictive than the rules in 
4.5.1.3 that determine whether two separately declared Fortran 
types, both with the BIND attribute, are the same. For the types
to be the same, the names of corresponding components must agree and 
all components must be public. It follows that two types may be 
different although they both interoperate with the same C struct 
type. 

EDITS:

Page and line numbers refer to 04-007.

[397:3] Subclause 15.2.2. At the end of the first paragraph add 
"Each has the BIND attribute but is not interoperable with any C
struct type." 

SUBMITTED BY: John Reid 

HISTORY: J3/05-151 at Meeting 171
