
                                                J3/05-147r1

To:      J3
From:    Bill Long/HPC
Subject: New Intents
Date:    8-Feb-2005


At M167, this idea got a Hate .. Love score of 4 - 2 - 5 - 1.
However, we think it's worth pursuing for the potential performance
benefits.

Either of these two new intents could be removed without
affecting the other.

Number: 

Title: New Intents

Submitted By: J3

Status: For Consideration

References: J3/04-135

Basic Functionality: 
-------------------

Add two new intents for dummy arguments:

INTENT(SCRATCH) specifies that the dummy argument is undefined on
entry and return. The argument may be used for scratch work space
only.  Compilers may be able to optimize this argument aggressively.

INTENT(NODEFREF) specifies that the argument will not be used within
the procedure. It is present for generic disambiguation only.
Compilers may be able to better follow the data flow of a program when
the procedure and its caller are not both visible.

Rationale:  
----------

Many older Fortran programs have dummy arguments which are used for
scratch work space only.  Any use of existing argument intents gives
wrong information to the compiler.  Also, in the process of converting
scratch work arrays in common blocks to allocatable dummy arguments,
there is no proper intent for 'scratch' variables.  An optimizing
compiler could scalarize a dummy argument array known to be scratch.
Also, final values of the dummy argument do not need to be stored.

Sometimes, an argument is used solely to disambiguate a generic
procedure reference. Common examples include functions where there are
otherwise no arguments with the type of the result, such as
IEEE_VALUE. If the compiler knows that the argument will not be
referenced or defined in the procedure, the call overhead could be
reduced.

Estimated Impact: The impact was rated as 5 on the John Reid scale at 167.
-----------------

Detailed Specification: 
-----------------------

Two new INTENT attributes are proposed, INTENT(SCRATCH) and
INTENT(NODEFREF).

The actual argument associated with a dummy argument with the
INTENT(SCRATCH) attribute shall be definable.  The dummy argument is
undefined upon entry to the procedure and becomes undefined upon
exit from the procedure.

A dummy argument with the INTENT(NODEFREF) attribute is undefined upon
entry to the procedure and shall not appear in a definition context
within the procedure. It shall not have the OPTIONAL attribute.


History: J3/04-135 at M167
