
                                                               J3/05-157

Date:      7 February 2004 
To:        J3 
From:      Van Snyder
Subject:   Add MOLD to ALLOCATE


Title: Add MOLD to ALLOCATE

Submitted by: J3

Status: For Consideration

References: J3/02-274, J3/03-254, J3/04-152 

Basic Functionality: 

A MOLD argument should be added to ALLOCATE similar to the SOURCE
argument, which would only give the type of the allocated data, but not
the contents. This would allow one to allocate an array of a given type
given only a scalar of that type, which is needed to design custom
allocators for various dynamic data structures.

Rationale: 

Certain dynamic data-structures strain the memory allocator to a maximum,
requesting allocation and deallocation of lots of nodes (i.e., small
allocations), while in actuality not really changing the total allocated
memory much. To deal with such situations efficiently across a variety of
compilers and usage patterns, it is best to include as part of the
dynamic data structure a memory "allocator". Such an allocator can be
made type-independent by using a scalar mold to give the type of the
allocation only, but not the contents.

There are other similar situations where it is desired to allocate a new
object of unknown dynamic type, and rather then clone the contents of
another object, perform default initialization on the newly allocated
object. This is very similar to the "new" operator in C++. 

The current SOURCE in ALLOCATE is not appropriate because it does a clone
operation:

1. "source-variable is then assigned to allocate-object by intrinsic
assignment for objects whose declared type is the dynamic type of
source-variable"

and there is also the restriction:

2. "The source-variable shall be a scalar or have the same rank as
allocate-object"

which means that one cannot allocate a whole array given just a scalar as
a type template (mold).

The alternative is to use a SELECT TYPE construct, which requires

1.  The names of the desired types are accessible, and

2.  One must know in advance all desired dynamic types.

Objections to these two requirements were the reason to add SOURCE to
the Fortran 2003 requirements.

Estimated Impact:

This feature has a modest impact on both the standard and compilers.

This is very simple to incorporate into the standard (Aleks Donev
proposed detailed edits earlier).

Implementation wise, the only difference with SOURCE is that default
initialization needs to be performed on a polymorphic variable, i.e.,
without knowing the type at compile-time. That is, one must have the run
time support to default-initialize a variable given its type descriptor
and address. This already needs to be done for polymorphic INTENT(OUT)
(see 270:38-41 in draft 03-007r2) variables, so the run-time support
neccessary for it needs to be in compilers already.

Detailed Specification:

Add a MOLD keyword to the ALLOCATE statement.  The allocated object shall
have the same dynamic type as the object specified by MOLD. Unlike
SOURCE, use default initialization instead of intrinsic assignment for
the value of the allocated object. Require the mold to be a scalar even
if the allocation is for an array.  MOLD and SOURCE shall not both
appear.

Therefore:

CLASS(base_type), POINTER :: var1, var2
TYPE, EXTENDS(base_type) :: dynamic_type_of_var2
END TYPE
TYPE (dynamic_type_of_var2), TARGET :: var3
var2 => var3
ALLOCATE(var1, MOLD=var2)

should be equivalent to:

SELECT TYPE ( var2 )
  ...
TYPE IS ( dynamic_type_of_var2 )
  ALLOCATE(dynamic_type_of_var2::var1)
END SELECT

History: J3/05-157 at J3 meeting 171
