
                                                      J3/05-140r1

Date:    09 Feb 2005
To:      J3
From:    Rich Bleikamp (/INTERP)
Subject: Separators in list-directed output involving UDDTIO

NUMBER: F03/0049
TITLE: Separators in list-directed output involving UDDTIO
KEYWORDS: list-directed output, separators, UDDTIO
DEFECT TYPE: Interpretation
STATUS: J3 consideration in progress

QUESTION:

Consider the following program:

MODULE m
  TYPE t
    INTEGER i
  END TYPE
  INTERFACE WRITE(FORMATTED)
    MODULE PROCEDURE formattedWriteT
  END INTERFACE
CONTAINS
  SUBROUTINE formattedWriteT(dtv, unit, iotype, v_list, iostat, iomsg)
    CLASS(t),         INTENT(IN)    :: dtv
    INTEGER,          INTENT(IN)    :: unit
    CHARACTER(LEN=*), INTENT(IN)    :: iotype
    INTEGER,          INTENT(IN)    :: v_list(:)
    INTEGER,          INTENT(OUT)   :: iostat
    CHARACTER(LEN=*), INTENT(INOUT) :: iomsg

    WRITE(unit, *) dtv%i, 'a'
  END SUBROUTINE
END MODULE

PROGRAM foo
  USE m
  TYPE(t) :: t1 = t(5)
  OPEN(10, FILE='foo.txt', ACCESS='SEQUENTIAL', FORM='FORMATTED', &
       DELIM='NONE')
  WRITE(10, *), 'xyz', t1, 'zyx'
END PROGRAM

10.9.2 of Fortran 2003 states that character sequences produced for
list-directed output are not separated from each other by value
separators when the delimiter mode is NONE.  The implication of this
is obvious when the adjacent effective output list items are both of
character type.  But when user-defined derived-type input/output
is involved, it is much less clear whether a separator should be
included in the output.

In the example given, it is unclear whether the output should be:
 xyz 5 azyx
or:
 xyz 5 a zyx

1. Should a separator be inserted between two non-delimited character
   sequences when one of the character sequences is written by a child
   data transfer statement, and the other is written by a parent data
   transfer statement, where both statements are list-directed?

2. Should a separator be inserted between two non-delimited character
   sequences when the character sequences are written by two different
   child data transfer statements, where both statements are list-directed?

3. Should a separator be inserted between two character sequences when
   one of the character sequences is written by a child data transfer
   statement, and the other is written by a parent data transfer
   statement, where one of the statements is list-directed and the
   other is format-directed?

4. Should a separator be inserted between two character sequences when
   the character sequences are written by two different child data
   transfer statements, where one of the statements is list-directed
   and the other is format-directed?


ANSWER:

1) No. It is the intent of the standard that when both the parent and child
   data transfer statements are both list-directed output statements, or both
   are namelist output statements, the processor treats the first list item
   appearing in a child data transfer statement as if that list item
   had immediately followed the last list item processed by
   the parent data transfer statement, as long as no other data transfers to
   that unit occurred inbetween the processing of those two list items.
   Therefore, in this case, the two character sequences are considered adjacent.

2) No. It is the intent of the standard that when two different child
   data transfer statements are both list-directed output statements, or both
   namelist output statements, they write to the same unit, and no other
   data transfers to that unit occur inbetween the two child data transfer
   statements, the processor treats the first list item
   appearing in the second child data transfer statement as if that list item
   had immediately followed the last list item processed by the first child
   data transfer statement.  Therefore, in this case, the two
   character sequences are considered adjacent.

3) It is processor dependent whether or not a separator appears between
   two such character sequences.  In section 10.9.2, the phrase
   "adjacent undelimited character sequences" refers to character sequences
   produced by list directed output.  When one of the sequences is written
   by a child or parent output statement that is not list directed, the
   exception described in the first paragraph of 10.9.2 does not apply.
   The other rules for inserting optional blanks around values in list directed
   output allow the processor to insert optional leading and trailing blanks
   around a list item.  The standard does not specify
   when optional blanks are written; therefore, when
   two adjacent list items (the values thereof) are written to an output
   record, and only one of them was written by list directed I/O, the standard
   does not specify whether or not any optional blanks appear
   between those values in the output record.

4) It is processor dependent whether or not a separator appears between
   two such character sequences.  See answer 3.


EDITS:

None.


SUBMITTED BY: Rob James

HISTORY: J3/05-140   m171 Submitted
         J3/05-140r1 m171 Draft J3 Response
