
                                                J3/05-147

To:      J3
From:    Dan Nagle
Subject: New Intents
Date:    2005 Jan 24


At M167, this idea got a Hate .. Love score of 4 - 2 - 5 - 1,
so it's (highly) subject to modification.  However, I think
it's worth pursuing.  The degree of difficulty was ranked as 5
on the John Reid scale.

Either of these two new intents could be removed without
affecting the other.

Number:

Title: New Intents

Submitted By: J3

Status: For Consideration

References: J3/04-135

Basic Functionality: Add two new intents for procedure arguments:

                     INTENT( SCRATCH) specifies that the argument
                     is undefined on entry and return, the argument
                     may be used for scratch work space only.
                     Compilers may be able to optimize this argument
                     aggressively.

                     INTENT() specifies that the argument
                     will not be used within the procedure, it is
                     present for disambiguation only.  Compilers
                     may be able to better follow the data flow
                     of a program when the procedure and its caller
                     are not both visible.

Rationale:  Many older Fortran programs have dummy arguments which
            are used for scratch work space only.  Any use of existing
            argument intents gives wrong information to the compiler.
            Also, in the process of converting common blocks to allocatable
            dummy arguments, there is no proper intent for 'scratch'
            variables.  A scratch array may be 'promoted' to a scalar
            when it is known that it really is scratch.  Also,
            initial and/or final values may not need to be computed.
            Sometimes, an argument is used solely to disambiguate
            a procedure reference.  The canonical example is the RNG function,
            where the argument is used only to select the result kind.
            Again, any use of the current intents misinforms the compiler.

Estimated Impact: The impact was rated as 5 on the John Reid scale at 167.

Detailed Specification: Two new procedure arguments are proposed, SCRATCH
                        and a disambiguation-only intent.  An argument
                        intended to be used for scratch work space only
                        might be designated INTENT(SCRATCH).  An argument
                        intended to disambiguate only might be designated
                        INTENT(), since there is no intent to use the argument
                        within the procedure.

                        INTENT(SCRATCH) indicates that the argument passes
                        no information into or out of the procedure; it is
                        used for scratch work space only within the procedure.
                        Such an argument must be definable, for example,
                        it must not be a constant, nor an expression.

                        An INTENT(SCRATCH) argument is undefined upon procedure
                        entry and upon procedure exit.

                        INTENT() indicates that the argument is used
                        to disambiguate the generic reference only, it may not
                        be used within the procedure in a context where its
                        definition is required.  It may be used in a
                        specification inquiry only.  It may not be
                        optional, since optional isn't used for generic
                        resolution.

History: J3/04-135 at M167
