
                                           J3/05-240r4
                          
To: J3
From: Dan Nagle
Subject: Execute an external program
Date: 2005 August 10

Specifications of J3-003

  Executes a command line externally to the program.
  Whether the command line is interpreted by a shell
  is unspecified.  Require synchronous execution and
  allow asynchronous execution.  If synchronous execution,
  allow recovery of the executed process exit status.
  Allow processor-dependent error conditions.

  If asynchronous execution is requested but the processor does not
  support asynchronous execution,
    (a) execute synchronously
    (b) set CMDSTAT, if present, to inform the user
    (c) set EXITSTAT if present.

Syntax:
add the intrinsic

EXECUTE_COMMAND_LINE( COMMAND, WAIT, EXITSTAT, CMDSTAT, CMDMSG )

Edits:

In Section 13.5.8, page 298, add to the list:

[298:5+] Add:
"EXECUTE_COMMAND_LINE      execute a command line"

In Section 13.7, add to the list of procedures:

[315:24+] Add:
 "13.7.5+ EXECUTE_COMMAND_LINE( COMMAND [, WAIT,
                                          EXITSTAT, CMDSTAT, CMDMSG ] )

*Description.* Execute the command line specified
               by the string COMMAND.  If the processor supports
               command line execution, it shall support
               synchronous and may support asynchronous execution
               of the command line.

*Class.* Subroutine.

*Arguments.*

COMMAND    shall be of type default character and
           shall be a scalar.  It is an INTENT(IN)
           argument.  Its value is the command line
           to be executed.  The interpretation is
           processor-dependent.

WAIT       shall be of type default logical and shall
(optional) be a scalar.  It is an INTENT(IN) argument.
           If WAIT is present with the value false, and the
           processor supports asynchronous execution of the external
           command, the command is executed asynchronously; otherwise
           it is executed synchronously.

EXITSTAT   shall be of type default integer and shall
(optional) be a scalar.  It is an INTENT(INOUT) argument.
           If the command is executed synchronously, it is assigned
           the value of the processor-dependent exit status.
           Otherwise, the value of EXITSTAT is unchanged.

CMDSTAT    shall be of type default integer and shall
(optional) be a scalar.  It is an INTENT(OUT) argument.
           It is assigned the value -1 if the processor does not
           support command line execution, a processor-dependent
           positive value if an error condition occurs,
           or the value -2 if no error condition occurs but WAIT is
           present with the value false and the processor does not support
           asynchronous execution.  Otherwise it is assigned the value
           0.

CMDMSG     shall be of type default character and shall
(optional) be a scalar.  It is an INTENT(INOUT) argument.
           If an error condition occurs, it is assigned a
           processor-dependent explanatory message.  Otherwise, it is
           unchanged.

When the command is executed synchronously, EXECUTE_COMMAND_LINE
returns after the command line has completed execution.
Otherwise, EXECUTE_COMMAND_LINE returns without waiting.

If an error occurs and CMDSTAT is not present, execution of the
program is terminated."
