
                                                             J3/07-013r1

Date:     2006 Nov 17
To:       J3
From:     Dan Nagle, Librarian
Subject:  Guidelines for Submitting J3 Papers

Ref: J3/96-140r1, J3/05-102r2, J3/05-013r1, J3/06-013

In 1996 The ANSI Fortran Technical Committee J3 moved to go "total
electronic" in terms of pre-meeting distribution, post-meeting
distribution, minutes, and announcements (see the referenced paper).
The purpose was to minimize or eliminate costs associated with hard copy
reproduction and mailing.  All documents at that time were made available
via anonymous ftp from a server maintained by Kurt Hirchert
at the University of Illinois.

Since that time, changes in information technology and publishing software
motivates this revision to the guidelines for submitting J3 papers.
The following guidelines for submitting papers for consideration by J3 were
discussed and approved by J3 at Meeting 178, November 13-17, 2006
in Las Vegas, Nevada.  The intent is that these guidelines be distributed
electronically to all principal members, alternates, observers, liaisons,
and correspondents, and implemented immediately.  Note that the guidelines
are similar to those of WG5 so as to maximize compatibility and familiarity
with electronic document handling and distribution for both organizations.

1.  Who may submit.

    Any member of J3, or any non-member who is interested in contribut-
    ing to the development and standardization of the Fortran scientific
    computing language may submit a paper to J3 for consideration.

2.  When to submit.

    J3 requires that papers that are to be considered at a duly scheduled
    meeting of the Committee be submitted to the Librarian at least two
    weeks prior to the meeting.  Papers submitted after this time will be
    considered by the Committee as time and work load permit, as long as
    there is no objection to considering such a "late paper".

3.  Procedure for submitting a paper to J3.

    a. The document will be prepared in an electronic format using only
       an ASCII character text file (e.g. extension .txt) with line feeds.
       J3 may choose to accept a paper in another format.  Papers submitted
       in the prescribed format may also, if desired, be submitted in
       other formats for inclusion on the server (e.g., .tex, .doc,
       .ps, .pdf, .wpd, .rtf, .ppt, .html, etc.).  A paper number should
       be inserted at the top right of the document.

    b. Before submitting the document to J3, the submitter should
       request a paper number from the J3 Librarian via email at
       (dnagle@erols.com).  The Librarian will assign a number of
       the form J3/yy-nnnrm where yy stands for the year, nnn stands
       for the paper sequence number, and rm stands for the revision
       number (if any).  The paper number should be inserted at the
       beginning (top right) of an ASCII document text file.

    c. J3 document files should be formatted so that they can be
       printed out conveniently on either A4 (European) or 8.5" x 11"
       (US) paper. The easiest way to do this is to set the margins as
       follows:
                           US                          A4

           Top       0.75 inch (1.91 cm)      1.00 inch (2.54 cm)
           Bottom    0.75 inch (1.91 cm)      1.19 inch (3.30 cm)
           Left      1.00 inch (2.54 cm)      1.00 inch (2.54 cm)
           Right     1.00 inch (2.54 cm)      0.75 inch (1.91 cm)

       If these margins are used for the appropriate size of paper,
       then the printed area will be 9.5" x 6.5", or 24.1 cm x 16.5 cm,
       regardless of the original paper size.   Do not use fonts other
       than the standard ones available on modern printers.  The
       preferred font is Courier New (10 characters per inch).

    d. When the document is completed and contains the assigned paper
       number, the submitter should send the file(s) via email to the
       J3 Librarian.  The Librarian will check the format and print out
       one copy of each paper to archive and use as an original for
       reproduction at the meeting if needed.  Then the Librarian will
       archive the electronic file(s) by uploading them to the current
       web server for compression and storage in the appropriate
       subdirectory on the server located at www.j3-fortran.org.

Authors of papers are advised that papers are listed by title, and
are assigned to subgroups for consideration by topic.  Therefore,
limiting any one paper to one topic described in the title assists the
processing of papers and is encouraged.  Likewise, authors wanting
to comment on clarity or editorial style are encouraged to limit
any one paper to one clause of the draft standard.

For each paper submitted or revised per the above guidelines and
stored on the server, the Librarian will update the standing document
J3/yy-000, which is available as the ASCII text file yy-000.txt on
the server.  The Librarian will also update the server file papermno.txt
(where mno is the next J3 meeting number), which is a list of the
papers currently submitted for consideration at the next J3 meeting mno.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
               J3 Librarian:  Dan Nagle
                      email:  dnagle@erols.com
