
                                                J3/06-167r1

To:   J3
From: Dick Hendrickson
Date: 7 May 2006
Subject: Edits For Documenting Compiler Versions
Reference: Repository J3-033, 05-123R2, 06-136R1, 06-148

This paper describes the edits for WG5 work item J3-033,
documenting compiler versions.  It is an amended version of
06-148, based on comments from Malcolm.

Paper 06-136R1 specified two new functions to document the
compile time environment.  They are:

      COMPILER_VERSION()
      Returns a processor dependent result that describes the
      compiler name, version, or related information.

      COMPILER_OPTIONS()
      Originally COMPILER_COMMAND_LINE() in 136R1
      Returns a processor dependent representation of the
      command line that invoked this compilation.  The result
      may include additional information, such as default
      options or options specified by environment variables.

EDITS:

1.
Insert a sentence in the new 2008 features list.  The exact
wording is left to the editor.  A suggestion is:

[xiii, insert as new item (1)]
"The COMPILER_VERSION and COMPILER_OPTIONS 
functions provide information about the translation phase of the
execution of a program."

2.
Modify chapter 7 to allow the new functions in
initialization expressions.

[126:3-4+] insert a new bullet item in the list move the
"or" from the end of bullet item (7) to item (8) and add
"(9) the COMPILER_VERSION or COMPILER_OPTIONS inquiry
functions from the intrinsic module ISO_FORTRAN_ENV
(13.8.2.1A, 13.9.2.1B)


3.
Add the functions to section 13.


[360:3] Insert "and intrinsic procedures" after "named
constants" so the new line reads
"The processor shall provide the named constants and
intrinsic procedures described in the following subclauses."

Alternatively, the section could be rearranged to separate
functions and constants.  There are other proposals to
rearrange this section and it is possible more functions
will be added (05-252).  

[360:6+] Insert two new sections in alphabetical order and a note
13.8.2.1A  COMPILER_OPTIONS()


Description. Returns a processor dependent string describing
              the options that controlled the program
              translation phase.

Class. Inquiry function.

Argument. None

Result Characteristics. Default character scalar with processor
-dependent length.

Result Value. A processor-dependent value which describes
the options that controlled the translation phase of program
execution.

Example:   COMPILER_OPTIONS() might have the value
            "/OPTIMIZE /FLOAT=IEEE /CHECK:SUBSCRIPTS".



13.8.2.1B  COMPILER_VERSION()

Description. Returns a processor-dependent string identifying
the program translation phase.

Class. Inquiry function.

Argument. None

Result Characteristics. Default character scalar with processor
dependent length.

Result Value. A processor-dependent value that identifies
the name and version of the program translation phase of the
processor.

Example:   COMPILER_VERSION() might have the value
            "Super-fast KL-10 Compiler Version 0.1".

NOTE: For both COMPILER_OPTIONS and COMPILER_VERSIONS the
processor should include relevant information that
could be useful in solving problems found long after the
translation phase.  For example, compiler release and patch
level, default compiler arguments, environment variable
values, and run time library requirements might be included.  
A processor might include this information in an object file
automatically, without the user needing to save the result
of this function in a variable.
