 
                                                            J3/06-179r2

To: J3
From: Dan Nagle
Subject: Reply to DARPA (Project of Drs. Leuke & Gordon)
Date: 10 May 2006

J3 is pleased that Drs. Leuke and Gordon were able
to present the concerns of DARPA to us, and to give J3 the opportunity
to understand those concerns and to discuss with them the issues involved.
It is difficult from the point of view of a standards technical committee
to address all these concerns within the confines of a language
specification for a number of reasons.  We discuss these reasons
in the following.

In short, a language standard specifies the means for writing
a correct program, and the effects of executing a correct program.
It cannot easily describe the effects of arbitrary occurrences
within an incorrect program.

The Fortran standard explicitly disavows any specification of the means
of file storage.  Specifically, there is no statement regarding source
files.  The immediate implication is that requirements expressed for line
numbers within a source file as part of error messages are difficult
to describe in the standard.  Some programs are created from source text
stored in databases, or are heavily preprocessed, with the result that
no file name and line number combination meaningful to the application
programmer exists anywhere.  Further complications such as inlining procedures
or other aggressive optimizations make the reporting of file-based line numbers
difficult.

Specific examples such as detection of the use of undefined variables
are difficult to implement and can require a large penalty
in execution resources.  J3 believes this problem is best treated
by platform-specific engineering solutions.  Others, such as subscript
bounds checking for assumed-size arrays for most vendors requires
a change to the calling sequences, that in turn negatively affects
library usage and interlanguage references.

The Fortran standard has features that promote the detection
of common programming errors.  These features include explicit interfaces
to subprograms (for detection during compilation of argument list
mismatches), the implicit none statement (to detect misspelled or
incorrectly declared names), provision for return status values
for input/output statements and memory allocation statements (to provide
an indication of the success or failure of the request), and the
strict rules for arrays of different ranks (which may be enforced
during compilation) and array extent bounds (which are usually
enforced optionally during execution) which promote detecting
array addressing errors.  Many cases, notably input/output statements
and memory allocation statements require the program execution to be
terminated if there is an error and the application programmer does not
include an explicit status variable.  Also, a compiler is required
to have the means of detecting syntax errors, or the use of any
syntax extensions.

How well a particular compiler documents its usage and makes available
indications of errors is beyond the standard's means to specify.
These factors are what are described as "Quality of Implementation"
issues.  Along with the size and complexity of a program that will
cause any particular processor to fail, these issues are not now
specified by the standard, and they could be specified by the standard
only with great difficulty in order to avoid inhibiting opportunities
for optimization.

Language design involves a number of tradeoffs, including a tradeoff
by the standard between ease of application debugging versus
efficiency of application execution.  The marketplace for compilers
is the best arbitrator of the balance between these competing goals.

Different vendors have chosen to emphasize different aspects
of compilers in their respective products.  Some have placed the emphasis
on execution efficiency, others have selected error detection; some
vendors have selected support for legacy programs, others have placed
correct compilation according to the latest revision of the standard
as the more important goal.  With varying emphasis in different compilers,
use of a variety of compilers often catches more problems than use
of any one compiler.

J3 strongly feels that the use of application coding standards to encourage
the best use of available features of any programming language is
a necessary ingredient when attempting to reduce the overall effort needed
to make and use application software.  Failing to use features already
present in a language weakens the case that new features are needed.  Use
of straightforward coding constructs and avoidance of constructs where
the intention is provided by subtle effects (and therefore errors are made
difficult to detect) is a part of the programming discipline.

A further issue arises in deciding whether to detect an error
during execution, or to detect the error during compilation.  Fortran
has long required the detection of many errors
during compilation.  J3 believes this early detection of errors
provides more efficient use of the application programmer's time
than detection of errors during execution.  Furthermore, it allows
the detection of consequent errors during compilation as well,
and it eases the diagnosis of other errors caught during execution.

Examination of status values returned from allocation statements and
input/output statements, for example, may lead to the discovery
of an incorrect value having been passed to the request thereby causing
the failure and program termination.  The standard's interface to the IEEE
floating point arithmetic capabilities of the underlying hardware is
another example of where the application programmer can control
the application program's behavior to report the occurrence of errors.

Many vendors provide compilers to support more than one programming
language, yet use a common code generator and run-time libraries
to provide the actual hardware instruction sequences.  Many times,
this imposes conflicting demands on code generators and library writers,
as different languages require different behavior in the face
of invalid operations.  Thus, a vendor might be unable diagnose
a programming error in a particular language because
of the requirements of another language.

Other tools exist beyond compilers and are almost always available
with the compiler.  These tools include symbolic debuggers, along
with profilers and other source code checking tools.  Symbolic debuggers
supply many of the requirements presented to J3.  J3 believes that these
tools are not so difficult to use as to prevent their use to achieve
the goals described to J3.

J3 is pleased to have heard the concerns expressed to it.  However,
the issues raised are more difficult to resolve than might have been
imagined.  J3 will keep these concerns in mind when developing future
revisions of the Fortran standard.  However, too much effort is required
to fully comply with the specific requests made for the revision
of the Fortran standard scheduled to be finalized during 2008.
