
                                                             J3/06-108

Date:    December 5, 2005
To:      J3
From:    Aleksandar Donev
Subject: Copy in/out and contiguous arrays

This paper continues the integration of the CONTIGUOUS attribute with
the rest of the standard, in particular, with the use of the TARGET
attribute in relation to copy in/out of actual array arguments.

BACKGROUND

There are situations in which it is necessary for a programmer to ensure
that there will be no copy in/out of array arguments, and that pointers
pointed to the dummy will be associated with the actual as well. This is
particularly useful in C Interop, where C may keep a pointer to a
Fortran array for future use, for example, asynchronous data transfer.

J3's response to this need was through a complex interp request (125) and
essentially consisted of: If one wants to ensure no copying will take
place, an assumed-shape or scalar dummy must be used, and both the dummy
and the actual must have the TARGET attribute.

This answer no longer holds true if the assumed-shape dummy has the
CONTIGUOUS attribute. Users must choose between one or the other. This
is very unfortunate, especially since one of the primary uses of
copy-less argument association is with contiguous arrays in relation to
using external procedures written in something other than Fortran.

Copying may be required if the actual is not contiguous. However, if it
is, then there is no need for it. In fact, it would be beneficial to
users to guarantee that it does not happen.

SPECIFICATION

Modify the words on page 270 so that if the dummy is an assumed-shape
array with the TARGET and CONTIGOUS attributes, and the actual has the
CONTIGUOUS attribute or is an assumed-size or explicit-shape array
(i.e., known at compile-time to be contiguous), then no copy in/out will
take place and pointers associated with the dummy will be associated
with the actual as well.

Note that one could make this more general and say that if the actual is
(runtime) contiguous no copying will take place, however, this requires
runtime checks and may inhibit some optimizations. The point is to allow
the user that really needs copyless association to get it, rather than
to prevent compilers for copying if that is beneficial.

SYNTAX

No new syntax is needed.

EDITS

The edits are somewhat involved and will require carefull crafting by DATA
subgroup. I will not attempt them by myself.
