
                                                              J3/06-148

To: J3
From: Dick Hendrickson/JOR
Date: 16 Feb 2006
Subject: Edits For Documenting Compiler Versions
Reference:  Repository J3-033, 05-123R2, 06-136R1

This paper describes the edits for WG5 work item J3-033, documenting compiler
versions.  Paper 06-136R1 specified two new functions to document the compile
time environment.  They are:

     COMPILER_VERSION()
     Returns a processor dependent result that describes the compiler name,
     version, or related information.

     COMPILER_COMMAND_LINE()
     Returns a processor dependent representation of  the command line that
     invoked this compilation.  The result may include additional information,
     such as default options or options specified by environment variables.

EDITS:

1.
Insert a sentence in the new 2008 features list.  The exact wording is left
to the editor.  A suggestion is:
[xiii, insert as new item (1)]
"J3 is proud to announce an exciting new concept in Fortran 2008: Processor
dependent functions that are user controllable!  The COMPILER_VERSION and
COMPILER_COMMAND_LINE intrinsic functions provide information about one
phase of the execution of a program."

2.
Modify chapter 7 to allow the new functions in initialization expressions.

[126:3-4+] insert a new bullet item in the list
move the "or" from the end of bullet item (7) to item (8) and add
"(9) The COMPILER_VERSION or COMPILER_COMMAND_LINE inquiry functions
(13.8.2.1A, 13.9.2.1B)

[127:10]  Insert ", if any," after "function argument"
so that the new line reads
"A specification inquiry where each designator or function
argument, if any, is"

3.
Add the functions to section 13.
[298:4+]  Insert after line 4
COMPILER_COMMAND_LINE ()          Obtain compiler invocation information
COMPILER_VERSION()                Obtain compiler identification

[360:3] Insert "and intrinsic procedures" after "named constants" so
the new line reads
"The processor shall provide the named constants and intrinsic procedures
described in the following subclauses."

Alternatively, the section could be rearranged to separate functions and
constants.  I think there are other proposals to rearrange this section
and it is possible more functions will be added.  Putting them in the
middle looks awkward, but can serve as a place holder.

[360:13] Insert two new sections and a note
13.8.2.1A  COMPILER_COMMAND_LINE()

Description. Return a processor dependent version of the command line
which invoked the compiler.

Class. Inquiry function.

Argument. None

Result Characteristics. Default character with processor dependent length

Result Value. A processor dependent value which represents the command
line which invoked the compile phase of program execution.  If there
was no command line, the result is processor dependent.

13.8.2.1B  COMPILER_VERSION()

Description. Return a processor dependent identification of the compiler.

Class. Inquiry function.

Argument. None

Result Characteristics. Default character with processor dependent length

Result Value. A processor dependent value which represents the compiler
name and version information.


NOTE:  The preceding two functions should return information that will
be useful in describing problems found long after the compilation phase
of program execution.  The processor is free to add other information,
such as default compiler arguments, environment variable values, run
time library requirements, etc., as appropriate.  Although they appear
to be functions, they should be evaluated and directly inserted in
the executable image (the ".o" file) as character values at compile time.
This will insure that the information refers to the current compile
step and allow for separate compilation.  Compilers should attempt to
place the values in the execution image in a way that will allow them
to be extracted by other tools in the event of a subsequent execution
failure.
