
                                                          J3/06-135

Date:        05-February-2006
To:          J3
From:        Bob Numrich
Subject:     Ragged allocatable/pointer co-arrays
References:  Feature UK-001, J3/05-208, J3/05-272r2, J3/06-122, J3/06-129

The proposal (J3/06-129) to outlaw co-array derived types with allocatable or pointer
components is ill-advised.  These structures are in fact the most important, the
most powerful, and the most useful features of the entire co-array model (Numrich,
Parallel Computing, 31:588-607, 2005).

The proposal for ragged allocatable and pointer co-arrays (J3/06-129) is also
ill-advised.  It violates the fundamental principles of the co-array model.

The first principle is simplicity.
The underlying philosophy of the co-array programming model is that it is
simple to understand and simple to implement.  It is designed so that existing
compilers and run-time systems can implement it with only minimal new technology.
New types of objects are not added to the language unless there is a compelling
reason for them.  A ragged array is a new type of allocatable object.
They provide no functionality that does not already exist.

The second principle is that the
rules for co-dimensions are the same as the rules for normal dimesnions unless
there is a compelling reason to change them.  The ALLOCATE statement for
these objects violates this principle because it requires the co-dimensions to
be specified in the declaration rather than being defined dynamically when
the allocate statement executes.  This has the major disadvantage that the
program is hard-wired to a specific co-shape and must be recompiled to change
the co-shape for each run when the total number of images changes. 

The third principle is that the compiler knows how to locate co-arrays from purely
local information.  A ragged array most likely will be placed on the local
heap and the dope vector describing the array will be stored somewhere in
local memory.  When the array is used with co-array syntax, the compiler will
have to retrieve the remote dope vector from another image.  How does the
compiler keep track of where these dope vectors
are located using purely local information?  It would need to build a large
table for every ragged array and there would have to be a global update of
all these tables, on all images, every time any image allocates or
deallocates one of these ragged arrays.  The ALLOCATE statement becomes a
complicated statement with global communication required across images.
But the proposal does not even require an implicit synchronization when one
of these objects is allocated or when a pointer is associated with local objects.
Might the local assignment of a ragged pointer generate global communication
across images?  Does such an assignment need to be a segment boundary statement?
Furthermore, suppose one of these ragged arrays is passed to a subroutine
where it is used as a co-array.  Across the subroutine call, all information
that this is a ragged array is lost.  How would the compiler know that it
needs to read up the remote dope vector?  In fact, the dummy argument
doesn't even have the same name.  Are we suggesting a whole new calling
sequence for ragged arrays?  In addition, the programmer must keep track of
lower bounds and upperbounds on remote images.  The LBOUND and UBOUND
intrinisic functions will need to access remote dope vectors to get this information.
Using this information will be error-prone and bugs wiil be difficult to find.

The proposal would allow assignment of a ragged pointer to a local target.  This
destroys the whole logic of the proposal.  Unless the implementation knows how
to handle references to local heaps, a reference to this local target from another
image will fail.  But this is the problem that the proposal was supposed to solve.
The memory for that local target has not been registered with the communication protocol.
Even if the local pointer assignment triggers global communication to update tables,
it will not work.  Even if the compiler reads up the local dope vector, it will not work.
It has all the same "problems" the proposal was trying to solve.

This proposal seems to be asking the language to make up for poor hardware design
and poor communication protocols.  Rather than indulging their
inability to design, or at least emulate, a global address space, we should
pressure them to learn how to handle the co-array model.

The situation is quite different from using allocatable components of
co-array derived types.  Co-arrays of derived type follow all the design
principles of the co-array model.  These objects are the same on all images,
and the compiler always knows how to find them from puerly local information.
The fact that these are co-arrays does not get lost across procedure calls
because they are always passed as co-array structures.
The compiler knows it needs to read up the dope vector for the
component because it is a component of a co-array structure.  It knows how to
find the dope vector from purely local information because it knows how
to find the co-array structure on any image and the dope vector for
each component will be located in the same place on each image.
If just the component of the co-array structure is passed to a
procedure, it can only be used as a local variable.

"Ragged" data structures are important.  Co-array structures with allocatable components
are the logical way to define them within the logical design of Fortran 90.  What is
"awkward" about using the normal Fortran syntax for type components?  The syntax
RAGGED_ALLOC[1]%ARRAY(3) is no more awkward than UNRAGGED_ALLOC(1)%ARRAY(3).  Is the
proposal suggesting that we change this syntax for references to components of an array
of derived types even for those that are not co-arrays?

Furthermore, derived type co-array structures encourage the use of
object-oriented techniaues.  An allocated array with the name RaggedArray may or
may not actually be a ragged array.  A derived type with the name RaggedArray, on
the other hand, can be guaranteed to be a ragged array by designing a constructor
that creates the data components correctly and records information about what
"ragged" means.  The derived type can contain as much or as little information as
one wishes including the relationship between RaggedArrays across images and
methods that perform communication among RaggedArrays across images.

There is a very simple, straightforward solution to the problem of supporting allocatables
that may or may not be associated with a co-array.  Just register ALL memory allocation
with the communication protocol if you have to.  With a little thought, there are
probably better solutions.  Let's get the cart before the horse.  Fortran was not
designed to support Seymour's vector architecture.  Seymour designed his machine to
support the Fortran.  I dare say, were he still with us, his parallel
machine would support a global address space and would be a perfect machine for
Co-Array Fortran. 
