
                                                           J3/06-269

Date: 3 August 2006
To: J3
From: Bill Long and John Reid
Subject: Issues 49,50,51,55 : co-indexed actual arguments
Reference: J3/06-007


Issue 49 (page 300)

Issue 49 proposes that an interface should not be required just
because one of the arguments in the procedure reference is a
co-indexed object.

As is noted in Issue 50, the choice to limit co-array actual arguments
to correspond only to dummies with the INTENT(IN) or VALUE attribute
causes inconsistencies with other parts of the language. On balance,
we have concluded that it is better to allow more general dummy
arguments.  Since the requirement of an interface was based on the
INTENT(IN) restriction, that requirement can be removed.


Issue 50 (page 313)

The note observes that the statement

  call sub(x[i])

is effectively the same as

  localvar = x[i]
  call sub(localvar)
  x[i] = localvar

which is the usual copy-in/out argument passing pattern. We agree, but
note that the assignment x[i] = localvar has limitations if x has
allocatable components.  These limitations would also have to apply to
the assignments implied by the use of x[i] as an actual argument.

On balance, we agree that allowing the compiler to generate both
copy-in and copy-out code for a co-indexed actual argument provides
better consistency in the language and should be permitted.  The
requirement of INTENT(IN) or VALUE for the dummy argument was aimed at
allowing only copy-in. We note that C616 (p. 117) prevents the actual
argument having a pointer component. However, it might be allocatable
or have an allocatable component; copy-out should not be permitted 
in this case since it might be reallocated with a different shape 
during execution of the subprogram (or, see 06-241 - issue 20, we
need to require that the shape matches). 

We believe the rule at [197:12-14] is sufficient to ensure memory
consistency among images even for the copy-out case. Subclause
12.5.1.10 on the other hand ensures that on the image where the
procedure reference is executed the co-indexed object is defined only
via the dummy argument.

Issue 51 (page 313)

The conceptual model for co-arrays is that of a distributed memory
system. Within that framework, the discussion of copy-in/out of
co-indexed actual arguments is relevant and useful as an explanation
of the normative text.

If both copy-in and copy-out are allowed, the note needs to be
reworded.

We agree with the observation that the phrase "and the corresponding
dummy argument is not a co-array" is extraneous and should not be part
of the If condition at the beginning of the Note. 

Issue 55 (page 316)

We agree with the editor's suggested constraint, and believe that the
VOLATILE attribute should be included as well, similar to constraints
C1236 and C1237, which also relate to the side-effects of copy-in/out.


Edits to J3/06-007

[299:30] Remove subitem (1) (b).

[312:23-24] Replace "and shall not have the INTENT(IN) or the VALUE
attribute." with ". If the actual argument is allocatable or has an 
allocatable ultimate component, the dummy argument shall have the 
INTENT(IN) or the VALUE attribute."

[313:1-] Replace the text of  Note 12.22 with:

"If the actual argument is a co-indexed object, it is likely that
implementations for distributed memory systems will make a copy on the
executing image of the actual argument, including copies of any
allocated allocatable subcomponents, and the dummy argument is
associated with that copy. If necessary, on return from the procedure,
the value of the copy is copied back to the actual argument."

[316:1+] Add a new constraint:

"C1235a (R1223) An actual argument that is a co-indexed object shall
not be associated with a dummy argument that has either the
ASYNCHRONOUS or VOLATILE attribute."
