
                                                                    J3/06-256

To: J3/B
From: Malcolm Cohen
Subject: Clause 12 niggles
Data: 2006/07/31

1. Introduction

This paper lists various technical niggles with clause 12.
Mostly without suggested edits.

2. CONTIGUOUS dummy pointers

This needs integration with auto-targetting.  It states

  "If the dummy pointer has the CONTIGUOUS attribute, the actual argument
   shall have the CONTIGUOUS attribute."

However, consider

  REAL,INTENT(IN),POINTER,CONTIGUOUS :: p(:)

This may be associated with an actual nonpointer.

Q1. Should the actual argument be required to be a POINTER or assumed-shape
    array?
A1. No!

Q2. Should that restriction apply to pointer and assumed-shape actual
    arguments?
A2. Yes.

Q3. What about all the other cases?
A3-safe. We should allow this when the actual argument is known at compile
         time to be contiguous.
A3-unsafe. We should make a runtime requirement for the actual argument to be
           contiguous.

Comment: It is a pity that we don't have a term for "known to be contiguous
         at compile time", especially since we have used the concept implicitly
         (in what we disallow from having the CONTIGUOUS attribute).

Note: The actual argument is always an "object" (perhaps designated by a
      pointer reference, but that case is easy - it is required to have the
      CONTIGUOUS attribute, right?).  So the answer really does boil down to
      the missing terminology assuming we want a sensible answer.

Possible answer: Allow all nonpointer non-assumed-shape arrays that are not
                 array sections.  This disallows some obviously-contiguous
                 cases, but at least it catches the trivial ones.

For subgroup discussion.

3. Allocatable dummy arguments and interp F90/125.

These don't seem to be completely integrated.
The text ([314:18-315:15]) certainly doesn't mention them.

Most of this text does not make much sense for allocatable dummies either.

Possible problems are:
  (i) scalar TARGET allocatable dummy, actual TARGET allocatable:
      the text states that any pointers associated with the actual become
      associated with the dummy, but I don't think that is true for INTENT(OUT)
      since the actual is deallocated on invocation.
 (ii) it is inconsistent to have the association state be perfectly defined for
      scalar allocatables but completely processor-dependent for allocatable
      arrays.  These should be treated the same.

Actually, because I misread the scalar case, 06-255 proposes making both of
them processor-dependent.  Having thought a bit more about this, I would
instead propose making both of them completely specified, and with the
INTENT(OUT) niggle clearly spelled out.

For subgroup discussion (the results of this discussion should maybe go into
a revision of 06-255 instead of this paper).

4. Allocatable dummy arguments + INTENT(OUT) + default initialization

See [315:34-39].
The second sentence is nonsense (or wrong) for allocatable dummies.
It needs to be rewritten (probably in 06-255).

5. Associated actual argument

In a few cases we are careful to say "argument-associated entity".
Almost always, though, we say "associated actual argument".

This is definitely wrong, since in the case of pointer actuals the
associated entity is not an actual argument.  It is possible that some
of these cases mean "corresponding actual argument", but surely almost
all of them must mean "argument-associated entity".

Since "argument-associated entity" sounds horrible, I propose defining
"associated actual argument" to mean it, viz

  [312:3+] 12.5.1.3 Argument association, at the very end, append new
           paragraph

    "The entity that is argument-associated with a dummy argument is called
     its <<associated actual argument>>.
     Note 12.xx
     If the dummy argument is not a pointer but its corresponding actual
     argument is a pointer, this is not an actual argument in the reference
     but is nonetheless referred to as the associated actual argument."

And go through the rest of 12.5.1.x checking all uses of the term "actual
argument".

Alternative fix:
  An alternative would be to invent a completely new term, e.g. "effective
  argument" for the argument-associated entity, and use that instead.

Alternative**2 fix:
  Or to invent a new term for the textual actual argument, reserving actual
  argument to mean that which gets argument associated.  Not recommended at
  this point because I cannot think of a particularly good term.

For subgroup discussion.

6. PURE constraint not compile-time checkable

In 12.5.0 (FIX!) the penultimate constraint C1233 is not only pointless but
uncheckable.

It is uncheckable because a PURE procedure is permitted to be described by an
interface block which says that it is not PURE (and indeed, is permitted to be
referenced without an explicit interface except from certain contexts).

It is completely pointless because C1279 ([334:8-9]) constrains a PURE
procedure to have only PURE dummies - and one is not permitted to pass an
impure actual to a pure dummy.  So this situation in C1233 cannot even arise.

One might also think C1233 stupid since it has not been integrated with
procedure pointer components - it only applies to named procedures.
Apparently it's ok to pass a nonpure procedure to a PURE procedure providing
one does so via a procedure pointer component - huh?

Given all these defects, C1233 and its following note really ought to go.
Because of C1279, deleting this junk makes no extra programs conforming,
and obviously has no effect on previously conforming programs.

Given the lack of effect (other than to fix brokenness in the standard),
there does not seem to be any need for an interp.

[310:19-20+2] Delete C1233 and Note 12.17.

7. Lots more

More niggles deferred to 06-256r1.

===END OF DOCUMENT===
