
                                                  J3/06-228

To:      J3
From:    Bill Long
Subject: C13 - UTI 71, 72 : SHIFTA
Date:    28-jul-2006

---------------------

Unresolved Technical Issue 71 (page 427) objects to the use of the
word "arithmetic" in the description of the SHIFTA function on the
grounds that, for the integer argument case, it implies a specific
binary representation for integers.  No such representation is
explicitly specified.

Reply: The term "arithmetic right shift" has been unofficially used
for this operation for some time without creating confusion.  However,
the important aspects of the function are the spelling of the name,
the argument characteristics, and the operation performed. The text of
the description could be changed if J3 feels this is important. If a
change is needed, I would suggest:

Edits:
-----

[346:23] Replace "Arithmetic right shift" with "Right shift with fill".

[426:24] Replace "Performs an arithmetic right shift"  with
"Performs a right shift with fill".

-----------------

Unresolved Technical Issue 72 (page 427) claims that the
interpretation of an integer as a sequence of bits in 13.3 is
"processor dependent" if the leftmost bit is set, and as a result, the
specified use of the leftmost bit by the SHIFTA function is flawed if
the I argument is of type integer.

Reply: This claim appears to be based on an error in 13.3. The final
sentence concerning processor-dependent interpretation in the case
where the left bit is set in an integer was deleted by an interp and
should not be included in this standard.  Furthermore, if the left bit
of an integer argument to SHIFTA is unusable, then all of the bit
manipultion functions are similarly defective.  For example, is the
BTEST function badly defined if the POS argument specifies the
leftmost bit in an integer I argument?  I believe not.  The issue
raised in UTI 72 is not an actual problem, and no changes in the
SHIFTA function description are required to address the issue.
