
                                                     J3/06-366r1

To: J3
From: R. Bleikamp 
Subject: interp F03/0048
Date: 15 November 2006

NUMBER: F03/0048
TITLE: Control edit descriptors in UDDTIO
KEYWORDS: Control edit descriptor
DEFECT TYPE: Erratum
STATUS: J3 consideration in progress

QUESTION:

Consider the following program:

MODULE m

  TYPE t
    INTEGER :: i = 0
  CONTAINS
    PROCEDURE, PRIVATE :: pwf
    GENERIC :: WRITE(FORMATTED) => pwf
  END TYPE

CONTAINS

  RECURSIVE SUBROUTINE pwf(dtv, unit, iotype, vlist, iostat, iomsg)
    CLASS(t),         INTENT(IN)    :: dtv
    INTEGER,          INTENT(IN)    :: unit
    CHARACTER(LEN=*), INTENT(IN)    :: iotype
    INTEGER,          INTENT(IN)    :: vlist(:)
    INTEGER,          INTENT(OUT)   :: iostat
    CHARACTER(LEN=*), INTENT(INOUT) :: iomsg
    WRITE(unit, '(i1, /)') dtv%i
    WRITE(unit, '(t1, a2)') 'AB'
  END SUBROUTINE pwf

END MODULE

PROGRAM foo
  USE m
  IMPLICIT NONE
  TYPE(t) :: a
  a%i = 3
  PRINT *, 'xyz', a
end program

9.5.3.7.2 states:
  A record positioning edit descriptor, such as TL and TR, used on
  unit by a child data transfer statement shall not cause the record
  position to be positioned before the record position at the time the
  user-defined derived-type input/output procedure was invoked.

The term "record position" is used, but it doesn't appear to be
defined anywhere.  Depending on the interpretation, the above program
might be standard-conforming, or it might not be.

If "record position" is taken to mean "the position within the current
record", regardless of which record is the current record, then the
record position at the beginning of the UDDTIO procedure is before the
fourth character of the record.  The first child data transfer
statement begins a new record, and the second child data transfer
statement writes to the first character of the new record.  This would
be before the "record position" at the time the UDDTIO procedure was
invoked, and the program would not be standard-conforming.

If "record position" is taken to mean a combination of the record and
the position within that record (essentially making it mean the same
thing as "file position"), then the above program is standard-
conforming, since the control edit descriptor doesn't cause the file
to be positioned before the record position when the UDDTIO procedure
was invoked.

What is the meaning of "record position", and is the above program
standard-conforming?

ANSWER:

The term "record position" is not well defined.

The intent of 9.5.3.7.2 was to prohibit a child data transfer statement
from possibily overwriting or re-reading any characters in the current
record that an active parent I/O statement had previously written or read.
9.5.3.7.2 should have used the term "file position" instead of
"record position". 

Therefore, the program is standard-conforming, and prints
 xyz.3
AB

where the first record starts with a space and the "." represents 0 or
more spaces.

Edits are supplied to clarify the intent of 9.5.3.7.2, 
add "file position" to the glossary, and remove the phrases
"record position" and "record positioning" from the standard.


EDITS: 

[202:34] In section 9.5.3.7.2, in the paragraph that begins with
    "Because a child data transfer statement does not position the
    file prior to data transfer,"

replace
    "list item or record positioning edit descriptor" 
with
    "list item or edit descriptor" 


[202:36] In section 9.5.3.7.2, replace the phrase
    "A record positioning edit descriptor, such as TL and TR,"
with
    "The edit descriptors T and TL,"

[463:4]  In section C.6.2, first paragraph, delete "record positioning"

[430:4+] In Annex A, add this definition:
  "<<file position>> (9.2.3): A connected <<unit>> has a file position.
  A unit's file position typically affects where the next data transfer
  operation will begin transferring data into or out of the file.  A
  file position is usually just before a record, just after a record,
  within a record, just before the first file storage unit in
  file, just after the last file storage unit in a file, or
  bewteen two adjacent file storage units."
  



SUBMITTED BY: Rob James

HISTORY: 05-139    m171  F03/0048 Submitted
         05-139r1  m171  Passed by J3 meeting
         05-170    m172  Failed J3 letter ballot #11
