
                                                           J3/06-367

To: J3
From: R. Bleikamp 
Subject: interp F03/0049
Date: 09 November 2006

Note: this paper only adds an EDIT to the interp, no other changes
were made.

NUMBER: F03/0049
TITLE: Separators in list-directed output involving UDDTIO
KEYWORDS: list-directed output, separators, UDDTIO
DEFECT TYPE: Interpretation
STATUS: J3 consideration in progress

QUESTION:

Consider the following program:

MODULE m
  TYPE t
    INTEGER i
  END TYPE
  INTERFACE WRITE(FORMATTED)
    MODULE PROCEDURE formattedWriteT
  END INTERFACE
CONTAINS
  SUBROUTINE formattedWriteT(dtv, unit, iotype, v_list, iostat, iomsg)
    CLASS(t),         INTENT(IN)    :: dtv
    INTEGER,          INTENT(IN)    :: unit
    CHARACTER(LEN=*), INTENT(IN)    :: iotype
    INTEGER,          INTENT(IN)    :: v_list(:)
    INTEGER,          INTENT(OUT)   :: iostat
    CHARACTER(LEN=*), INTENT(INOUT) :: iomsg

    WRITE(unit, *) dtv%i, 'a'
  END SUBROUTINE
END MODULE

PROGRAM foo
  USE m
  TYPE(t) :: t1 = t(5)
  OPEN(10, FILE='foo.txt', ACCESS='SEQUENTIAL', FORM='FORMATTED', &
       DELIM='NONE')
  WRITE(10, *), 'xyz', t1, 'zyx'
END PROGRAM

10.9.2 of Fortran 2003 states that character sequences produced for
list-directed output are not separated from each other by value
separators when the delimiter mode is NONE.  The implication of this
is obvious when the adjacent effective output list items are both of
character type.  But when user-defined derived-type input/output
is involved, it is much less clear whether a separator should be
included in the output.

In the example given, it is unclear whether the output should be:
 xyz 5 azyx
or:
 xyz 5 a zyx

1. Should a separator be inserted between two non-delimited character
   sequences when one of the character sequences is written by a child
   data transfer statement, and the other is written by a parent data
   transfer statement, where both statements are list-directed?

2. Should a separator be inserted between two non-delimited character
   sequences when the character sequences are written by two different
   child data transfer statements, where both statements are
   list-directed?

3. Should a separator be inserted between two character sequences when
   one of the character sequences is written by a child data transfer
   statement, and the other is written by a parent data transfer
   statement, where one of the statements is list-directed and the
   other is format-directed?

4. Should a separator be inserted between two character sequences when
   the character sequences are written by two different child data
   transfer statements, where one of the statements is list-directed
   and the other is format-directed?

ANSWER:

1) No. It is the intent of the standard that when both the parent
   and child data transfer statements are both list-directed
   output statements, or both are namelist output statements, the
   processor treats the first list item appearing in a child data
   transfer statement as if that list item had immediately
   followed the last list item processed by the parent data
   transfer statement, as long as no other data transfers to that
   unit occurred in between the processing of those two list items.
   Therefore, in this case, the two character sequences are
   considered adjacent.

2) No. It is the intent of the standard that when two different
   child data transfer statements are both list-directed output
   statements, or both namelist output statements, they write to the
   same unit, and no other data transfers to that unit occur
   in between the two child data transfer statements, the processor
   treats the first list item appearing in the second child data
   transfer statement as if that list item had immediately followed
   the last list item processed by the first child data transfer
   statement.  Therefore, in this case, the two character sequences
   are considered adjacent.

3) It is processor dependent whether or not a separator appears
   between two such character sequences.  In section 10.9.2, the
   phrase "adjacent undelimited character sequences" refers to
   character sequences produced by list directed output.  When one of
   the sequences is written by a child or parent output statement
   that is not list directed, the exception described in the first
   paragraph of 10.9.2 does not apply. The other rules for inserting
   optional blanks around values in list directed output allow the
   processor to insert optional leading and trailing blanks around a
   list item.  The standard does not specify when optional blanks are
   written; therefore, when two adjacent list items (the values
   thereof) are written to an output record, and only one of them was
   written by list directed I/O, the standard does not specify
   whether or not any optional blanks appear between those values in
   the output record.

4) It is processor dependent whether or not a separator appears
   between two such character sequences.  See answer 3.

EDITS: 

[241:5+] In Section 10.9.2, add the following to the end of the
         first paragraph:
  "Two undelimited character sequences are considered adjacent when
   both were written using list directed I/O, no intervening data transfer
   or I/O file positioning operations occurred, and both were written
   either by a single data transfer statement, or during the execution
   of a parent data transfer statement along with its child data transfer
   statements."


SUBMITTED BY: Rob James

HISTORY: 05-140    m171  F03/0049 Submitted
         05-140r1  m171  Passed by J3 meeting
         05-170    m172  Failed J3 letter ballot #11
