
                                                  J3/06-338

Date:    30 October 2006
To:      J3
From:    Bill Long
Subject: Issues 5,6, STOP semantics
Reference: J3/06-007r1, 06-236

---------------------

Discussion of issues 5 and 6 (page 194)

Based on the straw vote at meeting 177 that recommended that executing
STOP on one image not cause an immediate abort of other images, and
the suggestion in the internal notes for issues 5 and 6 in 06-007r1,
revised semantics for STOP are introduced as well as the concept of
error termination and a new statement to force error termination.

Semantics
---------

An image initiates termination if it initiates normal termination or
if it initiates error termination. Only after all other images have
initiated termination does termination complete on any image.  It is
possible for some images to normally terminate while others error
terminate. [Note: The implicit synchronization of all images at
termination avoids the difficulties with the concept of executing a
statement immediately after a SYNC ALL statement.]

Normal termination is initiated by exection of a STOP statement or an
END PROGRAM statement.

Error termination is initiated if

 1) an ALL STOP statement is executed,

 2) an error condition occurs during execution of an ALLOCATE,
    DEALLOCATE, SYNC ALL, SYNC TEAM, SYNC IMAGES, SYNC MEMORY, NOTIFY,
    or QUERY statement without a STAT= specifier,

 3) an error occurs during execution of an OPEN, CLOSE, READ, WRITE,
    BACKSPACE, ENDFILE, REWIND, FLUSH, WAIT, or INQUIRE statement
    without an IOSTAT= specifier,

 4) an error occurs during execution of a PRINT statement, or

 5) an error occurs during execution of the EXECUTE_COMMAND_LINE
    intrinsic subroutine ant the optional CMDSTAT optional argument is
    not present.

If an image initiates error termination, all other images that have
not already initiated termination initiate error termination.  Within
the performance limits of the processor's ability to send signals to
other images, this propagation of error termination should be
immediate.  The exact details are intentially left processor
dependent.

Execution of an image control statement other than END PROGRAM that
results in an attempt to synchronize with an image that has initiated
termination is considered an error condition.  If such a statement is
a SYNC ALL, SYNC TEAM, SYNC IMAGES, or blocking QUERY statement and
the statement includes a STAT= specifier, the status variable is
defined with the value -1, and the statement completes execution
without synchronizing with any other images. Subsequently executed
statements on that image shall not reference or define any part of a
co-array or be an image control statement other than END
PROGRAM. [Note: The program might execute some form of data saving or
checkpoint procedure, followed by execution of a STOP or ALL STOP
statement.]

Syntax
------

The syntax for the ALL STOP statement is

R855a <allstop-stmt>     is ALL STOP [<stop-code>]

The space between ALL and STOP is optional.


Edits
-----
(deferred)
