
                                                            J3/06-331r2

To: J3
From: Dan Nagle
Subject: List Processor Dependencies in an Annex
Date: 2006 Nov 14

Dependencies: none

OWGV is likely to recommend to language technical committees that
an Annex describing processor dependencies be added to those standards
currently lacking one.  For example, please see C99 Annex J, page 487.

The motivation is to aid applications programmers who want to know
all possible differences between processors, to aid tool makers who
want to know what might be indicated as possible variances between
processors, and to aid compiler vendors who may be asked to provide options
to allow various different allowed behavior.

The C committee's liaison to OWGV reports that Annex J is helpful
to the C community, and that the C committees have been praised
for having added it and for maintaining it.

This paper may not be complete, it is made by searching the 007r1 PDF
for processor dependency and adding the page, line and
a short description to an Annex to be added to 007r1.  Thus, the edits
here may be incomplete.

Edits:

(add new annex to the table of contents)
xi:[after Annex D]
"Annex E (Informative) Processor Dependencies ... <page>"

(relabel current Annex E)
xi: change "E" to "F"

(add new annex to document)
[650+] starting a new page, add

"Annex E (Informative) Processor Dependencies

This annex collects some information about processor dependencies
that appear in this International Standard.

This International Standard does not specify those properties
listed in clause 1.4.  Clause 1.5 describes certain error
detection capabilities that a standard-conforming processor must
provide.  This International Standard does not require
the processor to detect other violations of its requirements
by a program.

This International Standard does not specify which additional
intrinsic procedures or intrinsic modules a processor supports
(1.5 Conformance).

This International Standard places no ordering requirement
on the program units that constitute a program,
but because the public portions of a module are required
to be available by the time a module reference
(11.2.2 The USE statement and use association) is processed,
a processor may require a particular order of processing
of the program units (2.2.2 Program).

Whether an external file is available to all images
or only to particular images
is processor dependent (2.3.2 Program execution).

A processor might allow the number of images to be chosen
at compile time, link time, or run time.
It might be the same as the number of CPUs but this is not required.
Compiling for a single image might permit the optimizer
to eliminate overhead associated with parallel execution.
Portable programs should not make assumptions
about the exact number of images.
The maximum number of images may be limited due
to architectural constraints. (Note 2.5).

When a Fortran procedure is invoked,
the specification expressions within the specification-part
of the invoked procedure, if any,
are evaluated in a processor dependent order
(2.3.6 Execution sequence).

What companion processors a processor
has are not specified (2.5.10 Companion processors).

The processor character set is
processor dependent (3.1 Processor character set).

The means for specifying the source form,
free form or fixed form,
of Fortran source are processor dependent (3.3 Source form).

The maximum number of characters allowed
on a free form source line containing
characters not of default kind
is processor dependent (3.3.1 Free form source).

The maximum number of characters allowed
on a fixed form source line containing
characters not of default kind
is processor dependent (3.3.2 Fixed form source).

The maximum depth of nesting of include files
is processor dependent, as is the interpretation
of the **char-literal-constant** in the include line
(3.4 Including source text).

It is processor-dependent whether comments
in a macro definition appear in the expansion.
It is processor-dependent whether continuations
and consecutive blanks that are not part of a token
are preserved (3.5.2.1 General).
If a statement contains any character that is not of default kind,
the maximum number of characters allowed is processor dependent
(3.5.2.1 General).

The set of values supported by an intrinsic type
(other than logical and bits)
is processor dependent (4.1.1 Set of values).

The representation methods (4.1.1 Set of values) and
the kind type parameter values specifying
a representation method supported
by a processor is not specified by this International Standard.
(4.2 Type parameters).

The type kind value of a character type length is processor dependent
(4.4.5.1 Character sets).

A processor may restrict some or all control characters from occurring
in source when expressed in fixed form
(4.4.5.3 Character literal constant).

The processor defines the collating sequence for each character set
(4.4.5.4 Collating sequence).

The upper limit of the size supported by the BITS type is processor
dependent (4.4.7 Bits type).

When several objects are finalized
(4.5.6.3 When finalization occurs),
the order of finalization is processor dependent
(4.5.6.2 The finalization process).

Whether finalization occurs for objects in modules or submodules when
no active procedure references the module or submodule
is processor dependent,
or for objects allocated via pointer allocation
and all pointers have their allocation status changed so none of them
point to the object any longer, is processor dependent.  If finalization
occurs, it is processor dependent when it occurs
(4.5.6.3 When finalization occurs).

If an object is not defined to be contiguous,
or defined to be not contiguous,
it is processor dependent whether it is contiguous
(5.3.6 Contiguous attribute).

A STAT= variable in an allocate statement (6.3.1 ALLOCATE statement)
or a deallocate statement (6.3.3 DEALLOCATE statement)
becomes defined with a processor-dependent positive value
when an error occurs,
likewise, a ERRMSG= variable becomes defined
with a processor-dependent value.

If an unsaved allocatable local variable
of a module or submodule is allocated
when execution of a RETURN or END statement results
in no active scoping unit referencing the module or submodule,
it is processor-dependent whether
the object retains its allocation status or is deallocated
(6.3.3.1 Deallocation of allocatable variables).

In relational expressions where both operands are integers with the same
range but different type kind values, or are any combination of real
and complex with different type kind values but the same precision,
or when both operands are of type logical with different type kind values,
the type kind value of the expression is processor dependent
(7.1.4.2 Type, type parameters, and shape of the result of an operation).

The applications programmer may wish to read (7.1.8.4 Evaluation
of numeric intrinsic operations) if the precise translations
of numerical operations are of concern.

When performing array assignments, the processor may perform
the element-by-element assignment in any order.
When performing defined type assignments,
the processor may perform the component-by-component assignment
in any order or by any means that has the same effect
(this is undetectable by a standard-conforming program)
(7.4.1.3 Interpretation of intrinsic assignments).

Execution of a BLOCK construct causes evaluation
of the specification expressions within its specification-part
in a processor-dependent order (8.1.4 BLOCK construct).

Within a DO CONCURRENT construct, a pointer that
has its pointer association
changed in more than one iteration has a processor dependent association
status when the construct terminates (8.1.7 DO construct).

When an image is terminated by a STOP statement, its stop code, if any,
is made available in a processor-dependent manner (8.4 STOP statement).

If the STAT= or ERRMSG= specifier appears on a SYNC ALL, SYNC TEAM,
SYNC IMAGES, SYNC MEMORY, NOTIFY, or QUERY statement and an error
occurs during execution of one of these statements,
the variable becomes defined
with a processor-dependent positive integer value
(8.5.7 STAT= and ERRMSG= specifiers in image execution control statements).

Whether a processor allows a file to be viewed both as a record file and
as a stream file is processor dependent;
in this case the relationship between
the file storage units when viewed as a stream file and the records
when viewed as a record file is processor dependent
(9 Input/output statements).

A processor may prohibit some control characters
from appearing in a formatted record or a formatted stream file
(3.1 Processor character set).

At any given time, there is a processor-dependent
set of allowed access methods,
a processor-dependent set of allowed forms, a processor-dependent set
of allowed actions, and a processor-dependent set
of allowed record lengths for a file (9.2 External files).

The set of allowable names for a file is processor dependent
(9.2 External files).

When an external file is connected for formatted stream access,
the relationship
between positions of successive file storage units is processor dependent
(9.2.2.3 Stream access).

An asterisk identifies particular processor-dependent external units that
are preconnected for formatted sequential access
(9.5.4.2 Identifying a unit).
These units are also identified by unit numbers defined by the named
constants INPUT_UNIT and OUTPUT_UNIT of the ISO_FORTRAN_ENV module
(13.8.3 The ISO_FORTRAN_ENV intrinsic module).

This International Standard identifies
a processor-dependent external unit for the purpose
of error reporting.
This unit shall be preconnected for sequential formatted output.
The processor may define this to be the same as the output unit
identified by an asterisk.
This unit is also identified by a unit number defined
by the named constant ERROR_UNIT of the ISO_FORTRAN_ENV intrinsic module
(13.8.3 The ISO_FORTRAN_ENV intrinsic module).

At any given time,
there is a processor-dependent set of external units
that exist for a program (9.4.2 Unit existence).

Whether a unit may be connected to a file that is also
connected to a C stream is processor dependent.
If the processor allows a unit
to be connected to a file that is also connected to a C stream,
the results of performing input/output operations on such a file are
processor dependent.
It is processor dependent whether the files connected
to the units INPUT_UNIT, OUTPUT_UNIT, and ERROR_UNIT
correspond to the predefined C text streams
standard input, standard output, and standard error.
If a procedure defined
by means of Fortran and a procedure defined
by means other than Fortran perform
input/output operations on the same external file, the results
are processor dependent (9.4.3 Connection of a file to a unit).

If the ACTION= specifier is omitted on the OPEN statement,
the default value is processor dependent
(9.4.5.2 ACTION= specifier in the OPEN statement).

If the ENCODING= specifier
is omitted in an OPEN statement that initiates a connection,
the default value is DEFAULT, which is processor dependent
(9.4.5.7 ENCODING= specifier in the OPEN statement).

The name of a file opened with STATUS='SCRATCH'
is processor dependent
(9.4.5.8 FILE= specifier in the OPEN statement).

The interpretation of case in a file name is processor dependent
(9.4.5.8 FILE= specifier in the OPEN statement).

The value returned to a NEWUNIT= specifier is processor dependent
(9.4.5.10 NEWUNIT= specifier in the OPEN statement).

The character used to pad short input records containing non-default
characters is processor dependent (9.4.5.11 PAD= specifier
in the OPEN statement).

If the RECL= specifier is omitted for a file being connected
for sequential access, the default value is processor dependent
(9.4.5.13 RECL= specifier in the OPEN statement).

When a record contains any nondefault characters, the appropriate value
for the RECL= specifier is processor dependent
(9.4.5.13 RECL= specifier in the OPEN statement).

If the ROUND= specifier is omitted in an OPEN statement that
initiates a connection, the I/O rounding mode is processor dependent
(9.4.5.14 ROUND= specifier in the OPEN statement).

If the SIGN= specifier is omitted in an OPEN statement that
initiates a connection, the default value is processor dependent
(9.4.5.15 SIGN= specifier in the OPEN statement).

If STATUS='UNKNOWN' is specified in an OPEN statement,
the status is processor dependent (9.4.5.16 STATUS= specifier
in the OPEN statement).

Successful execution of an asynchronous data transfer statement
containing an ID= specifier causes the variable specified
in the ID= specifier to become defined with a processor-dependent
value (9.5.2.9 ID= specifier in a data transfer statement).

Any type mismatch caused by unformatted
input has a processor defined result
(9.5.4.4.1 Unformatted data transfer).

The units used for derived type transfers are processor dependent
(9.5.4.7.2 User-defined derived-type input/output procedures).

When an error occurs, the IOSTAT=
and IOMSG= specifiers return processor dependent values
(9.10 Error, end-of-record, and end-of-file conditions).

The action, if any,
of a FLUSH statement is processor dependent (9.8 FLUSH statement).

The case of letters returned
by INQUIRE statements for the FILE= specifier is processor dependent
(9.9.2.1 FILE= specifier in the INQUIRE statement).

The POSITION= specifier in an INQUIRE statement becomes defined
with a processor dependent value
(9.9.2.22 POSITION= specifier in the INQUIRE statement).

The value returned by the INQUIRE statement SIZE= specifier
is processor dependent
(9.9.2.29 SIZE= specifier in the INQUIRE statement).

The value returned by the IOLENGTH= specifier is processor dependent
(9.9 File inquiry statement).

The set of error conditions in input/output statements
is processor dependent
(9.10 Error, end-of-record, and end-of-file conditions).

During output to a Unicode file, if a character output list item or
character string edit descriptor contains a character that
is not representable in the ISO 10646 character type,
the result is processor-dependent (10.7.1 General).

On input, the interpretation of non-blank characters
within the parentheses
of a real NaN input field is processor dependent,
and the processor may supply either a signaling NaN
or a quiet NaN.
The interpretation of a sign in a NaN input field
is processor dependent (10.7.2.3.2 F editing).

On output,
the processor might print characters other than NaN or NaN()
when the value is a NaN.
Any non-blank characters between the parentheses
are processor dependent
(10.7.2.3.2 F editing).

Rounding mode, and the effect of the rounding
in cases where two real values are equally valid,
is processor dependent (10.7.2.3.7 Rounding mode).

When a dummy argument does not have the target attribute,
or does not match the actual argument in type,
whether any pointers that are pointer associated
with the actual argument
are associated with the dummy is processor dependent
(12.5.2.5 Ordinary dummy variables).

If the dummy argument has the TARGET attribute and
is an explicit-shape array,
an assumed-shape array with the CONTIGUOUS attribute,
or an assumed-size array,
and the argument associated entity
has the TARGET attribute but is not an array section
with a vector subscript
then (1) on invocation of the procedure,
whether any pointers associated with the effective argument
become associated with the corresponding dummy argument
is processor dependent,
and (2) when execution of the procedure completes,
the pointer association status
of any pointer that is pointer associated with the dummy argument
is processor dependent (12.5.2.5 Ordinary dummy variables).

If the dummy argument does not have the TARGET attribute,
any pointers associated with the actual argument do not become associated
with the corresponding dummy argument on invocation of the procedure.
If such a dummy argument is used as an actual argument that is associated
with a dummy argument with the TARGET attribute, whether any pointers
associated with the original actual argument become associated
with the dummy argument with the TARGET attribute is processor dependent
(12.5.2.5 Ordinary dummy variables).

The interface of a procedure defined by means other than Fortran may be
specified by an interface body or procedure declaration statement. If the
interface of such a procedure does not have a proc-language-binding-spec,
the means by which the procedure is defined are processor dependent
(12.6.3 Definition and invocation of procedures by means other than Fortran).

The values returned by some intrinsic procedures are processor
dependent approximations.  If this is the case,
it is noted in the description of each procedure
(13 Intrinsic procedures and modules).

If there is no default character corresponding
to the ACSII character that is the value
of the argument of the ACHAR function,
the result is processor dependent (13.7.2 ACHAR).

The extent to which a processor supports IEEE arithmetic
is processor dependent (14 Exceptions and IEEE arithmetic)."

(update annex letter of previous Annex E)
[651]
Change "Annex E" to "Annex F"
