
                                                            J3/06-331

To: J3
From: Dan Nagle
Subject: List Processor Dependencies in an Annex
Date: 2006 Oct 29

Dependencies: none

OWGV is likely to recommend to language technical committees that
an Annex describing processor dependencies be added to those standards
currently lacking one.  For example, please see C99 Annex J, page 487.

The motivation is to aid applications programmers who want to know
all possible differences between processors, to aid tool makers who
want to know what might be indicated as possible variances between
processors, and to aid compiler vendors who may be asked to provide options
to allow various different allowed behavior.

The C committee's liaison to OWGV reports that Annex J is helpful
to the C community, and that the C committees have been praised
for having added it and for maintaining it.

This paper may not be complete, it is made by searching the 007r1 PDF
for the string "processor dependency" and adding the page, line and
a short description to an Annex to be added to 007r1.  Thus, the edits
here may be incomplete.

Edits:

(add new annex to the table of contents)
xi:[after Annex D]
"Annex E (informative) Processor Dependencies ... <page>"

(relabel current annex E)
xi: change "E" to "F"

(add new annex to document)
[350+] starting a new page, add

"Annex E processor Dependencies

This annex collects some information about processor dependencies
that appear in this international standard.

This international standard does not specify those properties
listed in section 1.4, page 1.

This international standard does not specify which additional
intrinsic procedures or intrinsic modules a processor may support.

This international standard does not specify the order of processing
program units to transform them into an executable program.

Whether an external file is available to an image (2.3.2 Program Execution)
is processor dependent.

How a processor selects the number of images is not specified
by this international standard.  See Note 2.5 on page 14.

The order of evaluation of specification expressions (2.3.6 Execution
Sequence) in the specification part of a procedure is not specified.

Any companion processors (2.5.10 Companion Processors) a processor has
has are not specified.

The processor character set (3.1 Processor Character Set) is
processor dependent.

The means for specifying the free form for fixed form of Fortran source
is processor dependent (3.3 Source Form).

The maximum number of characters allowed on a free form source line containing
non-default characters is processor dependent (3.3.1 Free Form Source).

The maximum number of characters allowed on a fixed form source line containing
non-default characters is processor dependent (3.3.2 Fixed Form Source).

The maximum depth of nesting of include files (3.4 Including Source Text)
is processor dependent, as is the interpretation
of the **char-literal-constant** on the include line.

Whether comments present in a macro definition are also present
in the expansion is processor dependent (3.5.2.1 General),
as is continuation lines and consequetive blanks.

The set of values supported by an intrinsic type (other than logical)
is processor dependent (4.1.1 Set of Values).

The type kind values specifying a representation method supported
by a processor is processor dependent (4.4.1 Classification and Specification).

The type kind value of a character type length is processor dependent
(4.4.5.1 Character Sets).

A processor may restrict some or all control characters from being
representable characters when expressed in fixed form source (4.4.5.3).

The processor defines the collating sequence for each character set
(4.4.5.4 Collating Sequence).

The upper limit of the size supported by the BITS type is processor
dependent (4.4.7 Bits Type).

When several objects are finalized as specified by (4.5.6.3 When Finalization
Occurs), the order of finalization is processor dependent (4.5.6.2
The Finalization Process).

Whether finalization occurs for objects in modules or submodules when
no active procedure references the module or submodule
(4.5.6.3), or for objects allocated via pointer allocation
and all pointers have their allocation status changed so none of them
point to the object any longer, is processor dependent.  If finalization
occurs, it is processor dependent when it occurs.

If an object is not defined to be contiguous, or defined to be not contiguous,
it is processor dependent whether it is contiguous
(5.3.6 Contiguous Attribute).

The positive value assigned to a stat= variable in an allocate statement
(6.3.1) or deallocate statement (6.3.3) when an error occurs
is processor dependent, as is the value assigned to the errmsg= variable.

If an unsaved allocatable local variable of a module or submodule is allocated
when execution of a RETURN or END statement results in no active scoping unit
referencing the module or submodule, it is processor-dependent whether
the object retains its allocation status or is deallocated (6.3.3.1).

In relational expressions where both operands are integers with the same
range but different type kind values, or are any combination of real
and complex with different type kind values but the same precision,
or when both operands are of type logical with different type kind values,
the type kind value of the expression is processor dependent (7.1.4.2 Type,
type parameters, and shape of the result of an operation).

The applications programmer may wish to read (7.1.8.4 Evaluation
of numeric intrinsic operations) if the precise translation of numerical
operations are of concern.

When performing array assignments, the processor may perform
the element-by-element assignment in any order.  When performing defined type
assigments, the processor may perform the component-by-component assignment
in any order or by any means that has the same effect.

Execution of a BLOCK construct causes evaluation
of the specification expressions within its specification-part
in a processor-dependent order.

Within a DO-CONCURRENT construct, a pointer that has its pointer association
changed in more than one iteration has a processor dependent association
status when the construct terminates.

When an image is terminated by a STOP statement, its stop code, if any,
is made available in a processor-dependent manner.

If the STAT= or ERRMSG= specifier appears on a SYNC ALL, SYNC TEAM, SYNC IMAGES,
3 SYNC MEMORY, NOTIFY, or QUERY statement and an error occurs during execution
of one of these statements, the variable becomes defined
with a processor-dependent positive integer value.

Whether a processor allows a file to be viewed both as a record file and
as a stream file is processor dependent; in this case the relationship between
the file storage units when viewed as a stream file and the records
when viewed as a record file is processor dependent.

A processor may prohibit some control characters (3.1) from appearing
in a formatted record or a formatted stream file.

At any given time, there is a processor-dependent set of allowed access methods,
a processor-dependent set of allowed forms, a processor-dependent set
of allowed actions, and a processor-dependent set of allowed record lengths
for a file.  The set of allowable names for a file is processor dependent.

When an external file is connected for formatted stream access, the relationship
between positions of successive file storage units is processor dependent.

An asterisk identifies particular processor-dependent external units that
are preconnected for formatted sequential access (9.5.4.2).  These units are
also identified by unit numbers defined by the named
constants INPUT UNIT and OUTPUT UNIT of the ISO FORTRAN ENV module (13.8.3).

This standard identifies a processor-dependent external unit for the purpose
of error reporting. This unit shall be preconnected for sequential formatted
output. The processor may define this to be the same as the output unit
identified by an asterisk. This unit is also identified by a unit number defined
by the named constant ERROR UNIT of the ISO FORTRAN ENV intrinsic module.

At any given time, there is a processor-dependent set of external units
that exist for a program.

Whether a unit may be connected to a file that is also connected to a C stream
is processor dependent.  Whether a unit may be connected to a file that is also
connected to a C stream is processor dependent. If the processor allows a unit
to be connected to a file that is also connected to a C stream, the results
of performing input/output operations on such a file are processor dependent.
It is processor dependent whether the files connected to the units INPUT UNIT,
OUTPUT UNIT, and ERROR UNIT correspond to the predefined C text streams
standard input, standard output, and standard error. If a procedure defined
by means of Fortran and a procedure defined by means other than Fortran perform
input/output operations on the same external file, the results
are processor dependent.

If the ACTION= specifier is omitted on the OPEN statement,
the default value is processor dependent.  If the ENCODING= specifier
is omitted in an OPEN statement that initiates a connection,
the default value is DEFAULT, which is processor dependent.  The name
of a file opened with STATUS='SCRATCH' is processor dependent.
The interpretation of case in a file name is processor dependent.
The value returned to a NEWUNIT= specifier is processor dependent.
If the RECL= specifier is omitted for a file is being connected
for sequential access, the default value is processor dependent.
When a record contains any nondefault characters, the appropriate value
for the RECL= specifier is processor dependent.
If the ROUND= specifier is omitted in an OPEN statement that
initiates a connection, the I/O rounding mode is processor dependent.
If the SIGN= specifier is omitted in an OPEN statement that
initiates a connection, the default value is processor dependent.
If STATUS='UNKNOWN' is specified in an OPEN statement,
the status is processor dependent.  Successful execution
of an asynchronous data transfer statement containing an ID= specifier
causes the variable specified in the ID= specifier to become defined
with a processor-dependent value.  Any type mismatch caused by unformatted
input has a processor defined result.  The units used for derived type
transfers are processor dependent.  When an error occurs, the IOSTAT=
and IOMSG= specifiers return processor dependent values.  The action, if any,
of a FLUSH statement is processor dependent.  The case of characters returned
by INQUIRE statements for file names is processor dependent.  The POSITION=
specifier in an INQUIRE statement returns a processor dependent value.  The
value returned by the INQUIRE statement SIZE= specifier is processor dependent.
The value returned by the IOLENGTH= specifier is processor dependent.

The set of error conditions in input/output ststements is processor dependent.

During output to a Unicode file, if a character output list item or
character string edit descriptor contains a character that
is not representable in the ISO 10646 character type,
the result is processor-dependent.

On output, with I, B, O, Z, F, and G editing, the specified value
of the field width may be zero. In such cases, the processor selects
the smallest positive actual field width that does not result in a field
filled with asterisks.

On input, if characters other than NaN or NaN() are present in the file,
 the processor may supply either a signalling NaN or a quiet NaN.  On output,
the processor may print characters other than NaN or NaN() when the value
is a NaN.

Rounding of real values, and how to round in cases where two values are equally
valid is processor dependent.

When a dummy argument does not have the target attribute, or does not match
the actual argument in type, whether any pointers to the actual argument
are associated with the dummy is processor dependent.

If the dummy argument has the TARGET attribute and is an explicit-shape array,
an assumed-shape array with the CONTIGUOUS attribute, or an assumed-size array,
and the effective argument has the TARGET attribute but is not an array section
with a vector subscript then (1) on invocation of the procedure, whether any
pointers associated with the effective argument become associated
with the corresponding dummy argument is processor dependent, and
(2) when execution of the procedure completes, the pointer association status
of any pointer that is pointer associated with the dummy argument
is processor dependent. 

If the dummy argument does not have the TARGET attribute,
any pointers associated with the actual argument do not become associated
with the corresponding dummy argument on invocation of the procedure. If such
a dummy argument is used as an actual argument that is associated
with a dummy argument with the TARGET attribute, whether any pointers
associated with the original actual argument become associated
with the dummy argument with the TARGET attribute is processor dependent.

The interface of a procedure defined by means other than Fortran may be
specified by an interface body or procedure declaration statement. If the
interface of such a procedure does not have a proc-language-binding-spec,
the means by which the procedure is defined are processor dependent.

The values returned by mathematical intrinsic procedures are processor
dependent approximations.  If there is no default character corresponding
to the ACSII character indicated by the argument of the ACHAR function,
the result is processor dependent.

The extent to which a processor supports IEEE arithmetic is processor dependent.
