To: J3                                                07-195
From: R. Bleikamp
Subject: fixed form macro expansion
Date: 2007 April 24

The rules for macro expansion talk about 'lexical tokens', which are
defined as:
lexical token (3.2) : A sequence of one or more characters with a
                      specified interpretation.

A 'specified interpretation' makes sense in the context of
Fortran statements, but is less clear in the context of a macro
body (after writing this paper, i thinks its completely unclear
what we mean).   See the example below.

Possible approachs for defining a "lexical token" in a macro body
assuming fixed form include:
  1) assume the (expanded?) macro body is a sequence of fortran
     statements, and do the lexical analysis based on that, OR
  2) assume the macro body is in free form, and use spaces and
     punctuation are token delimiters, OR
  3) define a new syntax for tokens in a macro body (a purely textual
     definition)
- -
The problem with (1) is that the macro body isn't actually a sequence
of fortran statements, it merely needs to produce statements
after macro expansion.  Also, this definition of lexical tokens seems
to require more work from the compiler than might be desirable.
Also, some likely expansions are non-intuitive, for example:

      define macro :: foo(i)
          = 1 , i
      end macro
      define macro bar (x)
          DO 10 X
          expand foo (37)
      end macro
      expand bar(x)

The compiler can't tell if "DO 10 X" is one token, or 3 tokens,
until after it expands "foo".  At that point, it can tell that
we have a DO statement (and "DO 10 X" is 3 tokens).
If "foo" expanded to " = 1", then "DO 10 X" is one token.

I find this somewhat bizarre, even if it is a little perverse
(but then fixed form is pretty bizarre).

- -
Approach (2) (macro bodies are free form, even if
the source file is fixed form) is a bit cleaner, but will
undoubtedly seem absurd to the user.  I'm not sure it fixes
all the problems either.  In particular, will tokens such as
ENDDO (or END DO) in a macro body cause a problem?
- -
Approach (3) (some new simple tokenizing rules for macro bodies)
Seems easier to describe, understand and implement, but is not very
Fortran like.  More like a pre-processer that supports macros.
But I think (3) is by far the easiest to describe and understand.
The rules can be very similar to free form, probably simpler.
But have to handle tokens continued over a line boundry maybe?
- -

Recommendations: if approach (1) is desired (thats what the
standard seems to do now), I think an example that shows how
a wierd case is tokenized would be desirable.  I think approach 1 is
acceptable to the user, requires fewer edits to the standard, but is
clearly harder for the compiler to get right.


Approach 3 seems the most desirable to me, but requires more edits
to the standard.  I'm probably biased towards (3) since I've
written one too many Fortran lexical scanners.

