                                                                 07-233
To:		J3
From:		Michael Ingrassia
Subject:	Information for Hosts in Los Vegas
Date: 2007 May 11

With thanks to previous hosts Mallory North and Van Snyder, here is
some information that might or might not be of value to future hosts
in Las Vegas.

Where to shop:

VONS STORE #2390 475 E. Windmill Lane
	From Emerald Suites, go north towards the Strip.  Turn right on
	Windmill Lane.  VONS will be a mile or so further on the right.
Thakor/Spirit Gas 9111 S. Las Vegas Blvd.
	This is the gas station attached to the Emerald Suites property.
        Good in a pinch for stuff you didn't get at Vons.
KRISPY KREME - Silverado at 9791 S. Eastern Ave.
	From Emerald Suites, go south to Silverado Ranch Road.  Turn left
	on Silverado.  Proceed to Eastern Ave.  Krispy Kreme will be on
	the right.  Take the coupon to get punched and sometime in 2008
        we'll get a free dozen.  (Whoopee!)

At meeting 180 I did not shop at Sam's Club, Albertsons, Wal-Mart, or
	Food 4 Less but all these are relatively nearby.

What to buy:
        At least 36 12 oz. cans (cans not bottles) Club Soda
		(note: in Vons liquor section, not the soft drink section)
	Salsa
	Pretzels / Chips
	Vegetable platter (1 is enough for all week)
	Fruit platters as needed
	Fruit (bananas, Red apples, pears)
	1 or 2 boxes cereal (Muesli is popular)
	Chips and Salsa
	Chocolate (Hersheys miniatures, Hershey bars, M&M's)
	Cookies
        Crackers, assorted (including pretzels)
	String cheese
	Supplies (hefty paper plates, foam cups, paper cups (12 oz),
		paper bowls, 	)utensils)
	Soda  (diet coke, pepsi, coke, gatorade (but only a few))
	Orange Juice (with CALCIUM)
	Fruit smoothies (NOT Odwalla brand)
	2% milk (buy 1 gallon at a time)
	Microwavable popcorn
	Something completely different
	1 pound pre-ground coffee (not Starbucks)
	Iced canned coffee

	Cheesecake (Vons near the donuts on the edge of the store)
	Donuts (1 dozen every other day)

What to do:
	Check supplies.  Cups/coffee/utensils may be retained between meetings.
	Get receipts.  Save receipts.  Use to get reimbursed by Treasurer.
	Serve cheesecake on Wednesday.
