                                                          08-169
To:       J3
From:     Michael Ingrassia
Subject:  interp request: indistinguishable specifics
                for a generic interface with use association
Date: 2008 April 29

NUMBER: F03/nnnn
TITLE: indistinguishable specifics
		for a generic interface with use association
KEYWORDS: GENERIC RESOLUTION USE ASSOCIATION
DEFECT TYPE: Erratum

Consider the following program

       MODULE M1
         INTERFACE SUBR
           MODULE PROCEDURE SUBR1
         END INTERFACE
       CONTAINS
         SUBROUTINE SUBR1
         END SUBROUTINE
       END

       MODULE M2
         INTERFACE SUBR
           MODULE PROCEDURE SUBR2
         END INTERFACE
       CONTAINS
         SUBROUTINE SUBR2
         END SUBROUTINE
       END

       PROGRAM MAIN
         USE M1
         CALL S
       CONTAINS
         SUBROUTINE S
           USE M2
           CALL SUBR
         END SUBROUTINE
       END

Is this program standard conforming?

ANSWER:  Section 16.2.3 of the Fortran 2003 standard appears to forbid
the presence of such conflicting interfaces.   Section 12.4.4
clearly is written to allow for such conflicting interfaces, but
there is nothing in that section that modifies the sense of
Section 16.3.2.  The question then becomes, do the rules of 16.3.2
apply only to explicitly declared procedures and to procedures made
accessible through use association, or also to those accessible
through host association?

The committee concludes that the rules of 16.3.2 apply also to
procedures accessible through host association.  An edit is proposed
to make this clear.   Although some of the
language in 12.4.4.1 could therefore be simplified, it is still useful
for processors which extend the standard by relaxing some of the rules
in 16.3.2 and there is no reason why it should not remain normative.
A NOTE could be added to this section.


EDITS:

At [04-007.pdf:407:25-26] change

"This subclause contains the rules that shall be satisfied
by every pair of specific procedures that have
the same generic identifier within a scoping unit"

to

"This subclause contains the rules that shall be satisfied
within a scoping unit by every pair of specific procedures that have
the same generic identifier, whether the specific procedures are
intrinsic or are defined in the scoping unit itself, in the host,
or in a module used by the scoping unit."

At [04-007.pdf:278:5+] add

NOTE: In a standard conforming processor which has not extended
(i.e. relaxed) the rules laid out in Section 16.3.2 for pairs of
specific procedures, the above rules can be effectively replaced
by the somewhat simpler rule

-----------------------------------------------------------
(*) Consider the set of specific interfaces of a generic interface that
has that name and is in the unit in which the reference appears
together with specific interfaces of a generic interface made
accessible by a USE statement in the scoping unit.  If the scoping unit
has a host scoping unit and the name is established to be generic in
that host scoping unit, then additionally include in the
considered set the specific interfaces of the generic interface in the
host scoping unit (regardless of whether the name is accessible in the
scoping unit).  If the scoping unit contains
an INTRINSIC attribute specification for that name or a USE statement
that makes that name accessible from a module in which the
corresponding name is specified to have the INTRINSIC
attribute, then additionally include in the considered set the
interfaces of this intrinsic procedure.

Then if the reference is consistent with a nonelemental reference to
one of the procedures in the set, the reference is to that specific
procedure.  Failing that, if the reference is consistent with an
elemental reference to one of the procedures in the set, the reference
is to that specific procedure.

In each case the rules
in 16.2.3 ensure that at most one such specific procedure is specified.
------------------------------------------------------------

SUBMITTED BY: Robert Corbett and Michael Ingrassia

HISTORY: 08-nnn m184    F03/nnnn Submitted



        --Michael I.
