                                                            08-249r2
To: J3
From: Michael Ingrassia
Subject: Public Comment J32035
Date: 2008 August 15

----------------------------------------------------------------------

Commenter: James Giles
Subject: "IMPURE ELEMENTALs"

I don't see the value in having IMPURE ELEMENTAL procedures.
There are no examples in the draft standard and the only
example in the document describing new features can be
rewritten without the procedure being ELEMENTAL at all.
The example in the document is:

   impure elemental function accumulate (a,sum)
      real :: accumulate
      real, intent(in) :: a
      real, intent(inout) :: sum
      sum = sum + a
      accumulate = sum
   end function accumulate

Where the call is:

   real a(n), sum
      :
      sum = 0.0
      a = accumulate (a,sum)

This seems simple enough.  But suppose SUM was also declared
to be an array.  The procedure would no longer "accumulate".
Nor would it generate any error messages or warnings.  An
elemental is simply not a good way of accompishing such things
in the first place.  You're trying to graft inappropriate
functionality in a place it doesn't fit well.

Now, if the procedure were declared:

   function accumulate (a,s)
      real, intent(inout) :: s
      real, intent(in) :: a(:)
      real :: accumulate(size(a))
      s = sum(a)
      accumulate = s
   end function accumulate

The caller could be the same.  The SUM argument could even be made
optional - it is certainly required to remain a scalar.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

J3 response:

The case for impure elementals was made in J3 meeting paper 05-238,
from meeting 173 in 2005.  The feature had earlier been proposed by the
UK delegation as item UK-011.  The case for them was sufficiently
convincing that they were added to the work plan for the current
revision.  One of the several reasons for their inclusion in the work
plan was their applicability to the reverse mode of automatic
differentiation.  Another reason for impure elemental procedures is
that a pure elemental procedure cannot contain a variable with the SAVE
attribute, or assign a value to a variable in common or accessed by use
or host association.  An application where this is important is random
number generators.

The example cited in the comment does not appear in the current draft.
One could accumulate into a scalar variable "SUM" by making "SUM" 
a variable in COMMON rather than a dummy argument (to avoid canonical
promotion of scalar dummy arguments of ELEMENTAL procedures to arrays).  
This was part of the justification for impure elementals:  
a pure ELEMENTAL procedure is not permitted to update a variable
in COMMON but an impure ELEMENTAL procedure can.

Further, your example of writing the procedure without the procedure
being elemental at all is somewhat misleading.  The example handles rank=1
arrays.  What is needed is a procedure which handles arrays of all ranks
from 1 to 15.

J3 decided not to remove impure elemental procedures, or change their
description.
