								08-210r3
To: J3
From: Toon Moene
Subject: Public comment J32002
Date: 2008 August 12

Comment by Francois-Xavier Coudert
Subject: Fortran 2008 comment

The Fortran 2008 standard provides intrinsic procedures for conversion
between different kinds of logical, integer, real and complex types.
It does not, however, provide such functionality for characters.
As conversion between different character kinds is allowed in
assignment statements, the way it happens is already specified
and little work is required to add an conversion intrinsic.

Such a conversion intrinsic would be useful, especially in a number of
cases where it allows for a more compact coding style, compared to having
an extra variable and using an assignment statement. Some examples of this,
reported by GNU Fortran users who tested the recently added UCS-4 support,
include converting a wide character string when passing it to a routine
(such as error-reporting routine, or informational argument to a library
routine) that expects a character argument of the default kind; this is
particularly interesting in the case where the user has no control over
the library function.

To add such an intrinsic, I suggest adding the following text to
section 13.6:

CHARACTER (STRING [, KIND])

Description. Conversion between kinds of characters.

Class. Elemental function.

Arguments.
STRING shall be of type character.
KIND (optional) shall be a scalar integer initialization expression.

Result Characteristics. Character. If KIND is present, the kind type
parameter is that specified by the value of KIND; otherwise, the kind
type parameter is that of default character type. The length of the result
is the same as the length of STRING.  Result Value. The result is the
conversion of STRING to the result kind type parameter, under the same
rules as character intrinsic assignment. Each character of the result
is equal to ACHAR(IACHAR(c) [, KIND]), where c is the character at the
same position in STRING.

Example. On a processor where SELECTED_CHAR_KIND("ISO_10646") has the
value 4, CHARACTER ("ABC", 4) has the value 4_"ABC".


The following line should also be added to Table 13.1 (section 13.5):
Procedure: CHARACTER
Arguments: (STRING [, KIND])
Class: E
Description: Conversion between kinds of characters.

J3's response:

Unfortunately, the premise that intrinsic assignement between character
variables of different kind is allowed is wrong. See table 7.10 on
page 152 of the CD: "Type conformance for the intrinsic assignment".
Character assignments are only allowed for "the same kind type parameter".
J3 considers the mapping between characters of different kind
difficult to define.
Consequently, J3 will not consider this addition.
