                                                           09-181
To: J3
From: Van Snyder
Subject: Fodder for coarray TR
Date: 2009 April 03
References: 09-007r1

1. Allow whole-array coindexed object references.  As Malcolm pointed
out in e-mail of Jan 15 21:48:06 EST 2009, "The decision [to prohibit
them] has already caused harm to the standard as Van pointed out, and
will continue to cause harm (by the added complication) to people
trying to untangle our complicated syntax, compiler writers if they can
be bothered to follow the standard (they have to write additional tests
to conform to the standard, once we allowed coarray scalars there was
no possibility of simpler syntax parsing), users who don't see the
reason they should be forced to write tedious unnecessary additional
text.

2. Allow automatic coarrays.  This requires synchronization at
procedure (BLOCK) entry if a procedure has any automatic coarrays.
Synchronization is already required at procedure (BLOCK) exit if the
procedure (BLOCK) allocates any local coarrays.  Actually the processor
will probably emit a bunch of deallocates, each conditional on whether
the object is allocated, and each one of those will cause a
synchronization.  It might be more efficient to have one
synchronization at procedure entry, instead of one at each explicit
allocation and deallocation of what would otherwise be an automatic
coarray.  It is possible for a procedure to provide for numerous
automatic arrays more efficiently than a user can with explicit
allocations, by visiting the allocator once to get enough memory for
all the automatic objects, then working out their addresses, and
finally visiting the deallocator only once when they disappear.  The
same might hold for automatic coarrays.

3. Allow coarrays with intent(out) to have allocatable components.
This requires synchronization at procedure entry if a procedure has any
such arguments.  Synchronization is already required at procedure exit
if the procedure allocates any local coarrays.  It might be more
efficient to have one synchronization at procedure entry, instead of
one at each explicit deallocation of a coarray component of a dummy
argument that would otherwise have intent(out).  Not having intent(out)
might compromise the efficacy of some optimizations of referencing
scoping units.
