                                                           J3/09-188r1
Date: 2009 May 5
To:       J3
From:     Dan Nagle, Librarian
Subject:  Guidelines for Submitting J3 Papers

Ref: J3/96-140r1, J3/05-102r2, J3/05-013r1, J3/06-013, J3/08-013

In 1996 The ANSI Fortran Technical Committee J3 moved to go "total
electronic" in terms of pre-meeting distribution, post-meeting
distribution, minutes, and announcements (see the referenced papers).
The purpose was to minimize or eliminate costs associated with hard copy
reproduction and mailing.  All documents at that time were made available
via anonymous ftp from a server maintained by Kurt Hirchert
at the University of Illinois.

Since that time, changes in information technology and publishing software
motivates this revision to the guidelines for submitting J3 papers.
The following guidelines for submitting papers for consideration by J3 were
discussed and approved by J3 at Meeting 188, May 4-8, 2009
in Las Vegas, Nevada.  The intent is that these guidelines be distributed
electronically to all principal members, alternates, observers, liaisons,
and correspondents, and implemented immediately.  Note that the guidelines
are similar to those of WG5 so as to maximize compatibility and familiarity
with electronic document handling and distribution for both organizations.

1.  Who may submit.

    Any member of J3, or any non-member who is interested in contribut-
    ing to the development and standardization of the Fortran scientific
    computing language, may submit a paper to J3 for consideration.

2.  When to submit.

    J3 requires that papers that are to be considered at a duly scheduled
    meeting of the Committee be submitted to the Librarian at least two
    weeks prior to the meeting.  Papers submitted after this time will be
    considered by the Committee as time and work load permit, as long as
    there is no objection to considering such a "late paper".

3.  Procedure for submitting a paper to J3.

    a. The document will be prepared in an electronic format using only
       an ASCII character text file (file name extension .txt) with new
       lines.  Please limit the line length to 75 characters or less.
       This allows the document to be read by all members and to be easily
       modified during processing.  J3 may choose to accept a document in
       another format.  Papers submitted in the prescribed format may also,
       if desired, be submitted in other formats for inclusion on the
       server (for example, .tex, .doc, .ps, .pdf, .wpd, .rtf, .ppt,
       .html, .ood, .pages, .opd, or other).  The content of the document,
       in every format submitted should be as similar as possible.

    b. To submit a document to J3, members, and those who attend J3
       meetings, should please use the upload page on the
       J3 server, in the members-only area.  Non-members should
       email the document to the Librarian.  Upload the text version
       of the paper first, and use the paper number you are assigned
       for the same paper in any other format, and in any revisions of
       your paper.  Except for the original text file, a paper number
       should be inserted at the top right of the documents first page
       (or every page if possible).  The paper number and date are
       automatically added to the text version.

    c. J3 document files (other that text files) should be formatted so
       that they can be printed conveniently on either A4 (European)
       or 8.5" x 11" (US) paper. The easiest way to do this is to set the
       margins as follows:

                           US                          A4
           Top       0.75 inch (1.91 cm)      1.00 inch (2.54 cm)
           Bottom    0.75 inch (1.91 cm)      1.19 inch (3.30 cm)
           Left      1.00 inch (2.54 cm)      1.00 inch (2.54 cm)
           Right     1.00 inch (2.54 cm)      0.75 inch (1.91 cm)

       If these margins are used for the appropriate size of paper,
       then the printed area will be 9.5" x 6.5", or 24.1 cm x 16.5 cm,
       regardless of the original paper size.   Do not use fonts other
       than the standard ones available on modern printers.  The
       preferred font is Courier New (10 characters per inch).

Authors of papers are advised that papers are listed by title, and
are assigned to subgroups for consideration by topic.  Therefore,
limiting any one paper to one topic described in the title assists the
processing of papers and is encouraged.  Likewise, authors wanting
to comment on clarity or editorial style are encouraged to limit
any one paper to one clause of the draft standard.

For each paper submitted or revised per the above guidelines and
stored on the server, the Librarian will update the standing document
J3/yy-000, which is available as the ASCII text file yy-000.txt on
the server.  The Librarian will also update the server file papermno.txt
(where mno is the next J3 meeting number), which is a list of the
papers currently submitted for consideration at the next J3 meeting.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
               J3 Librarian:  Dan Nagle
                      email:  dannagle@verizon.net
