To: J3                                                 J3/09-192
From: Rolf Rabenseifner and Craig Rasmussen
Subject: Additional request from the MPI Forum
Date: 2009 April 19
References: 08-185r1, 08-255, N1759

08-185r1

The MPI Forum has been restarted in order to update the Message Passing
Interface (MPI) standard.  As part of this standardization effort, a new
Fortran binding will be created for version 3.0 of the MPI standard.
Previously (see 08-185r1) the MPI Forum has requested that J3 consider
modifying the Fortran standard to accomplish the following:

  1. A mechanism to suppress copy-in/copy-out semantics for MPI
  asynchronous operations.

  2. Suppress argument checking for MPI choice buffers (C void * formal
  parameters).

These two items have been addressed by new features (assumed type and
assumed rank) in N1759.

An additional item needs to be addressed in the new MPI 3.0 Fortran
bindings.  During asynchronous (split phase) communication, a programmer
first requests that a buffer be sent (or received) and later in the code
later waits for the request to finish.  For example,

CALL MPI_IRecv(buffer,...,request,...) ! request receive into buffer
...
CALL MPI_Wait(request,...)             ! wait for communication to finish

Following completion of the MPI_Wait call, the buffer argument can now be
referenced.  Especially since buffer doesn't appear as an argument to
MPI_Wait, there is nothing to prevent the compiler from aggressive
optimizations with respect to the buffer array.

At meeting 185, the use of the VOLATILE, ASYNCHRONOUS, and TARGET
attributes to protect MPI buffers from overly aggressive optimizations
was discussed, but no conclusions were reached and no votes were taken.
An additional possibility was suggested in 08-255 by Aleksandar Donev
to the ASYNCHRONOUS attribute in conjuction with SYNC MEMORY statements.

The VOLATILE attribute may be used to signal to the compiler that a
variable may be modified asynchronously by an external mechanism.
However, this disables all optimizations involving the variable.  The
disabling of all optimizations is not needed, particularly since in
conforming MPI programs, the variable will not be referenced or defined
while asynchronous data transfer is occuring, just as required in F2003
for variables involved in async I/O.  Many within the MPI Forum have
expressed concern about the performance implications of use of the
VOLATILE attribute.

One possible solution that has been suggested is to use the BLOCK
construct to limit the scope of VOLATILE attribute.  For example,

CALL MPI_IRecv(buffer,...,request,...)
...
CALL MPI_Wait(request,...)
BLOCK
   VOLATILE :: buffer
END BLOCK
a(1) = buffer(1)

The MPI Forum requests guidance of WG5 on how to address this issue
in MPI 3.0.
