                                                             J3/09-299
To: J3
Subject: ASYNCHRONOUS and VOLATILE in BLOCK
From: Bill Long
Date: 2009 November 08

Discussion:

The draft currently allows a program to give the ASYNCHRONOUS or
VOLATILE attribute to a variable within a block, whilst the same
variable does not have the attribute outside the block.  This feature
presents significant implementation difficulties. Compilers normally
associate attributes with a variable on a scoping-unit basis,
resulting a variable tagged using this feature ending up with the
attribute everywhere it exists, defeating the intent of the
feature. Furthermore, it is hard to determine whether these
declarations create a new variable or just modify the attributes of an
existing variable.  The variable might appear in a statement thousands
of lines later and, because of implicit typing, be a variable global
to the programming unit and not local to the BLOCK. The compiler would
need to determine this state to know whether to save the value of the
variable or to remove its existence a the end of the block. The
chances for user error are significant. Given these difficulties, the
capability of giving the ASYNCHRONOUS or VOLATILE attributes to a
variable in a BLOCK should be removed unless the variable is also
declared as a construct entity in the same block. This makes the
treatment of the ASYNCHRONOUS and VOLATILE attributes consistent with
other attributes in block declarations.

Edits for 09-007r3:

[90:21-22] In "5.3.4 ASYNCHRONOUS attribute", para 4, delete the
second sentence which reads "Within a BLOCK construct ... outside the
BLOCK construct."

[102:11-12] In "5.3.19 VOLATILE attribute" delete the third
constraint, C561.
{The 'that is not a construct entity' qualification is no longer
possible}.

[102:14-15] In "5.3.19 VOLATILE attribute" para 2, delete the second
sentence which reads "Within a BLOCK construct ... outside the BLOCK
construct".

[172:4-7] In "8.1.4 BLOCK construct", para 2, replace "Except for the
ASYNCHRONOUS and VOLATILE statements, specifications" with
"Specifications". Delete the second sentence of the paragraph, which
reads "The appearance of the name ... outside the construct".
{As a result the entire paragraph becomes the single sentence
"Specifications in a BLOCK construct declare construct entities whose
scope is that of the BLOCK construct (16.4)."}

[444:15] In "16.4 Statement and construct entities", in the third
sentence of para 1, delete ", other than only in ASYNCHRONOUS and
VOLATILE statements,".
{As a result the sentence becomes "An entity that is explicitly
declared in the specification part of a BLOCK construct is a construct
entity."}
