                                                                09-217
To: J3
From: Malcolm Cohen
Subject: Rewritten 09-171r1
Date: 2009 April 30
References: 09-171r1

1. Introduction

There are a number of confusions and misconceptions in the question, let
alone the proposed answers, for the interp request in 09-171r1.  Leaving
such confusions in an interp question serves little useful purpose, so I
rewritten the entire thing to answer what it seems to be asking.   It is
entirely possible that I have misunderstood the idea behind the question
here, if so my apologies.


2. The rewritten interpretation

----------------------------------------------------------------------

NUMBER:
TITLE: Elemental specific intrinsic procedure characteristics
KEYWORDS: Elemental intrinsic, procedure pointer, dummy procedure
DEFECT TYPE: Interpretation
STATUS: J3 consideration in progress

QUESTION:

(1) Are the specific intrinsic procedures (listed in 13.6 and not
    marked with a bullet) elemental or nonelemental?

(2) What rank do those specific intrinsic procedures have?

(3) May one of those procedures become associated with a dummy
    procedure or procedure pointer with nonzero rank?

(4) When one of these procedures is associated with a dummy procedure
    or procedure pointer, does it still have the elemental property?

ANSWER:

(1) Those specific intrinsic procedures are elemental.

(2) They are elemental functions; thus they are scalar in themselves,
    but may be applied to an array in which case the reference will
    be an array.

(3) No.  As elemental procedures, by definition the dummy arguments
    and result have rank zero.  This does not satisfy the requirements
    for procedure argument or procedure pointer association.

(4) The specific intrinsic procedure itself retains the elemental
    property (so a reference using its own name can be elemental), but
    the dummy procedure or procedure pointer associated with it is not
    elemental and so cannot be used to reference the specific
    intrinsic procedure elementally.

EDIT:

None.

SUBMITTED BY: Van Snyder

HISTORY: 09-171r1  m188  Submitted
         09-217    m188  Revised question and answer

----------------------------------------------------------------------

3. Random grumblings

09-171r1 claims that the combination of constraint C728 and 7.4.2.2p6
implies that
  "a nonelemental specific intrinsic procedure is associated with the
   procedure pointer as its target".
This completely ignores the fact that there are no nonelemental specific
intrinsic procedures in that list!  So this cannot be the case.  The plain
meaning of the words in the standard are that a nonelemental procedure
pointer becomes associated with an elemental specific intrinsic procedure.

It further asks the self-contradictory question
  "For each intrinsic function listed in 13.6 and not marked with a bullet,
   does there exist a nonelemental specific intrinsic version for every
   rank, or only for rank zero?"
This is nonsense because this list is of *specific* intrinsic procedures.
The defining property of a specific procedure is that it is a "specific"
(in the English sense) procedure, i.e. a known single actual procedure.
If there were multiple version they would, by definition, be generic and
not specific.

In any case, there are no nonelemental specifics here, they are all
elemental.

It says again
  "The implication of these texts is that a nonelemental specific
   intrinsic procedure is the actual argument associated with the dummy
   argument."
And I say again no, there are no such animals, they are elemental specific
intrinsic procedures which the standard permits to become associated with
a nonelemental dummy procedure.

(The paper goes further to propose a horrible new feature via the
interpretation processing mechanism.  This is inappropriate when asking
about something that has been in the language for 18 years and 2 previous
standards.)

===END===
