To: J3                                                 09-212
From: Jim Xia
Subject: memory operations and SYNC MEMORY
Date: 2009 April 24
References: 09-007r1

There seems to be some conflicting views on what SYNC MEMORY should do
with regard to memory operations.  In particular, the draft doesn't
specify what kind of memory operations are affected in the normative text.
The only mention of memory operations is given in Note 8.38 as:

"...ensures that all memory operations initiated in the preceding segments
in its image complete before any memory operations in the subsequent
segment in its image are initiated..."

This seems to imply that those memory operations truly local to the image
are also required to be guarded by the SYNC MEMORY statements.  This is
harmful for performance because it requires the most expensive memory fence
to implement SYNC MEMORY, and prohibits optimization opportunities for
memory operations that are truly local to the executing image.  Since SYNC
MEMORY statements specify segment boundaries so that different images can
synchronize (specify segment ordering) with each other using
synchronization primitives such as SYNC ALL or SYNC IMAGES, etc, it is
therefore not necessary to require local memory operations to be fenced in
by SYNC MEMORY.

In addition, UPC specification has a similar construct to SYNC MEMORY:
upc_fence.  According to UPC V1.2, the upc_fence is to

"insure[s] that all shared accesses issued before the fence are complete
before any after it are issued."

It clearly states that ONLY shared access memory operations are affected
by upc_fence.  This seems to introduce incompatibility between coarrays
and UPC, which could result in difficulties in extending coarrays to be
inter-operable with UPC shared arrays.

It will be beneficial to implementers of coarrays and programmers to
clarify that SYNC MEMORY only impact memory operations that are related to
coarrays.

EDITS:

    [193:19+] 8.5.5 SYNC MEMORY statement

    Prepend a paragraph in Note 8.38
    "In the following paragraph, the term memory operation refers to
     any memory operation that cuases effects observable by other images."
