To: J3                                                 09-231
From: Craig Rasmussen
Subject: Answer to MPI Forum regarding MPI asynchronous operations
Date: 2009 May 6
References: 09-211, 09-192, N1761

DISCUSSION

09-192 officially asks WG5 for guidance on support of split phase
communications.  Guidance is given on how to achieve the following:

! initiate data transfer of boundary
CALL MPI_IRecv(buffer(:,1),...,request,...)
! do work on interior of the buffer while transfer is in progress
CALL UPDATE_INTERIOR(buffer)
! wait for the communication to finish
CALL MPI_Wait(request,...)
! reference buffer boundaries
A = buffer(:,1)

It is common to hide the MPI calls within other procedures so that
the communication libraries can be changed.  Thus the calls to
the MPI procedures are not required to be in the same scope as the
simple example shown above.  Therefore, using block constructs
with existing syntax (VOLATILE for example) cannot be used
to limit the scope of the performance implications of using
VOLATILE attribute.

This paper provides a new attribute ASYNC_VAR for declaring variables
involved in asynchronous operations.  This attribute would be useful
for code beyond just MPI.  (There may be better names for the attribute
other than ASYNC_VAR.)  The effect of using the ASYNC_VAR attribute
is to inhibit certain optimizations like code motion and copy-in/copy-out
with respect to a variable with the attribute.


SYNTAX:
-------
Add a new <attr-spec> for type declarations:

     ASYNC_VAR

Add a new ASYNC_VAR statement that specifies the ASYNC_VAR attribute
for a list of objects.


SEMANTICS:
----------

An entity with the ASYNC_VAR attribute is a variable that may be subject
to asynchronous operations other than asynchronous Fortran I/O.

The base object of a variable shall have the ASYNC_VAR attribute in a
scoping unit if
  - the variable appears in an executable statement or specification
    expression in that scoping unit and
  - any statement of the scoping unit is executed while the variable is
    participating in any asynchronous operation affected by means other
    than Fortran.

An explicit interface is required for a subprogram with a dummy
argument with the ASYNC_VAR attribute.

A dummy variable with ASYNC_VAR attribute may not also have the VALUE
attribute.

An object with the ASYNC_VAR attribute may be associated with an object
that does not have the ASYNC_VAR attribute, including by use (11.2.2) or
host association (16.5.1.4).  Within a BLOCK construct, an object may
have the ASYNC_VAR attribute even if it does not have the attribute
outside the BLOCK construct. If an object has the ASYNC_VAR attribute,
then all of its subobjects also have the ASYNC_VAR attribute.

Restrictions on an actual argument in C1238, C1239, and C1240 also
pertain to objects with the ASYNC_VAR attribute.  These constraints
disallow operations that would force a processor to use copy-in/copy-out
argument passing mechanisms.

If a variable has the ASYNC_VAR attribute, then:
-If it is referenced by means not specified by the program during
the execution of a statement, then it shall not be defined or become
undefined during the execution of that statement.
-If it is defined or becomes undefined by means not specified by
the program during the execution of a statement, then it shall not
be referenced, defined, or become undefined during the execution of
the statement, or become associated with a dummy argument that
has the VALUE attribute during that segment.

NOTE

The ASYNC_VAR attribute specifies the variables that might be associated
with a pending asynchronous operation implemented in C (or by other means
other than Fortran) while the scoping unit is in execution.  This
information could be used by the compiler to disable certain code motion
optimizations.  In this respect, the ASYNC_VAR attribute is similar to
the ASYNCHRONOUS attribute.

EXAMPLE

Example of the use of asynchronous message passing for abstracted
MPI_irecv and MPI_wait routines.

In C:  void MPI_irecv (void * buffer_desc, int req);
       void MPI_wait (int req);

In the Fortran MPI module:

   interface
      subroutine MPI_irecv (buffer, req) bind(c,name="MPI_irecv")
         type(*), dimension(..), ASYNC_VAR :: buffer
         integer(c_int), intent(out) :: req
      end subroutine
      subroutine MPI_wait (req) bind(c,name="MPI_wait")
         integer(c_int), value :: req
      end subroutine
   end interface

In user code:

  integer :: request
  real :: x(10,10), y(10)


  ASYNC_ARG :: x

  ! Start asynchronous transfer into the border region of x,
  ! this call returns before the transfer has been completed
  call MPI_irecv(x(1,:), req) ! border region is not contiguous

  ! Update interior portion of x(2:10,:), doing computations
  ! These can be optimized by the compiler, so long as the
  ! borders are not touched by the optimizer

  ! Wait for border region to arrive, this call only returns
  ! once the transfer has been completed
  call MPI_wait(req)

  ! Now border region can be referenced
  y = x(1,:)

EDITS:

TBD.
