To: J3                                                       10-142r2
From: Bill Long
Subject: C Interoperability Objectives
Date: 2010 February 19
References: J3/05-159, J3/06-171r1, N1761.txt, N1808.pdf



1. Introduction
---------------

The purpose of TR 29113 is:

    C interoperability in the Fortran Standard provides for the
    sharing of some forms of data between Fortran and C.  However, it
    does not address procedures that have data pointer, allocatable,
    assumed- shape, or optional dummy arguments.  This work item aims
    to develop ways and means, using facilities provided by the
    companion Fortran processor, to allow C functions to handle such
    Fortran dummy arguments directly.

This has been extended by the addition of assumed-type and
assumed-rank arguments.  Constraints on those are mentioned later.

The TR does not have further extensibility as an objective, except as
explicitly mentioned.


2 Requirements
--------------

2.1 General 
-----------

Requirement 1:

     A mechanism should be provided to enable a C programmer to
     conveniently obtain the address of a particular element within an
     assumed-rank, assumed-shape, allocatable, or pointer array.

Requirement 2:

     If it is reasonably feasible, a mechanism should be provided for
     C function to specify by explicit declaration the type or rank
     (both preferred) of an assumed-shape, allocatable, or pointer
     object. The objective is to provide a facility for type and rank
     safety.

Constraint 1:

     It is generally the case that assumed-shape, allocatable, and
     pointer objects are represented in implementations as a
     descriptor. It is reasonable to assume the same will be true of
     assumed-rank objects. The descriptor used within Fortran to
     describe an object should not be visible to the C function that
     has access to the corresponding object in a C function.



2.2 Assumed-type
----------------

Requirement 3:
	
    A dummy argument declared assumed-type should be compatible with
    an actual argument of an arbitrary interoperable type, or of
    assumed-type. It is not required that the interface for the
    procedure specify bind(c). A mechanism to inquire the type of an
    assumed-type dummy argument in a C function is not required.

Constraint 2:

    Assumed-type dummy arguments may appear as actual arguments. Apart
    from that, such dummy arguments are usable only in a procedure
    which can access them with the type of the ultimate argument that
    is not assumed-type.  There is no intent to provide such a
    mechanism for this use in Fortran.  An explicit interface is
    required for a procedure with an assumed-type dummy argument.


2.3 Assumed-rank
----------------

Requirement 4:

    A dummy argument declared assumed-rank should be compatible with
    an actual argument of an arbitrary rank, or of assumed-rank. It is
    not required that the interface for the procedure specify bind(c).

Requirement 5:

    A mechanism to inquire the rank of an assumed-rank object shall be
    provided.

Requirement 6:

    A mechanism to inquire the bounds and strides in each dimension of
    an assumed-rank array shall be provided to a C function. An
    assumed-rank array is not required to be contiguous.

Constraint 3:

    Assumed-rank dummy arguments may appear as actual arguments. Apart
    from that, such arguments are usable if passed to a procedure
    which can access them with the correct rank. There is no intent to
    provide such a mechanism for this use in Fortran.  The interface
    of a procedure called with an actual argument that is assumed-rank
    shall be explicit. An explicit interface is required for a
    procedure with an assumed-rank dummy argument.

2.4 Optional Arguments
----------------------

Requirement 7:

    Interoperable interfaces should allow OPTIONAL dummy arguments.

Constraint 4:

    Dummy arguments with both the OPTIONAL and VALUE attributes are
    not required to be interoperable.


2.5 Assumed-shape Arrays
------------------------

Requirement 8:

    (a) An interface with bind(c) may include assumed-shape dummy
    arguments. The called procedure should be able to access the
    shape, strides, and elements of the dummy argument.

    (b) A C function should have a mechanism to create an array that
    it can use as an actual argument corresponding to an assumed-shape
    dummy of a Fortran procedure.  The same mechanism should allow an
    existing block of memory in the C function, including an array
    passed into the C function, or memory accessed as a global object,
    to be passed to an assumed-shape dummy in Fortran.

    c) In the scope of a C function, the lower bounds of an
    assumed-shape dummy argument are assumed to be zero. In a Fortran
    procedure, the lower bounds of an assumed-shape dummy are assumed
    from its declaration.


Constraint 5:

    The memory that is associated with a Fortran assumed-shape dummy
    argument should be memory that is accessible in Fortran using
    normal variable definitions or references.

    Array strides of zero and overlapping elements are not supported.


2.6 Allocatable Objects
-----------------------

Requirements 9:

    a) The requirements and constraints that apply to assumed-shape
       arrays also apply to ALLOCATABLE ones (including converting
       them to assumed-shape), excluding the interpretation of lower
       bounds of an assumed-shape array.

    b) A mechanism should be provided for a C function to allocate and
       deallocate ALLOCATABLE objects passed from Fortran.  The
       mechanism should provide a means for the C function to specify
       the bounds for array being allocated.

    c) A mechanism should be provided for a C function to create an
       ALLOCATABLE object that can be passed as an actual argument to
       Fortran corresponding to an ALLOCATABLE dummy argument.  Such
       an ALLOCATABLE object should be capable of allocation and
       deallocation using Fortran ALLOCATE and DEALLOCATE statements.

    d) INTENT(OUT) ALLOCATABLE dummy arguments are permitted in a
       BIND(C) routine.  It is the responsibility of the processor to
       deallocate the actual argument in any cross-language call.  It
       is not required for the processor to handle this in C-to-C
       calls.


2.6 Pointer Arrays
------------------


Requirements 10:

    a) all of the requirements and constraints that apply to
       ALLOCATABLE arrays, except as noted in the following
       requirement, also apply to POINTER ones.

    b) C should be able to allocate memory for POINTER arrays,
       starting from C pointers, and pass them to Fortran as such.


Constraint 6:

    Neither Fortran nor C may deallocate pointers associated with a
    target by the other.


3 Goals
-------

These are not part of the requirements, but might affect the
implementation model.

   a) Execution efficiency is important, which definitely means that
      data remapping should not be needed, but it is unclear beyond
      that.

   b) Minimize the work required to modify the Fortran compiler.


4 Features not included
-----------------------

In the discussion of the requirements for the TR, additional
requirements were suggested, but failed to achieve sufficient
consensus to be included in the TR. These might be considered as part
of a future standard. They are:


   a) Make assumed-length character an interoperable type.

   b) Expand the uses of assumed-rank objects within Fortran.
