To: J3                                                 10-109r2
From: Aleksandar Donev
Subject: Comment GB-6 Error Termination (Subclause 2.3.5)
Date: 2010 February 16
References: WG5/N1802, WG5/N1803, J3/09-007r3


DISCUSSION

The current wording overspecifies error termination in paragraph 4 of 2.3.5
(Execution sequence). Specifically, requiring one image to be able to force
others into synchronisation without them executing any special statement is
a heavy burden on implementors, and may not always be feasible.

The current wording specifies that, if image 1 executes an ALL STOP
statement, and image N is not responding, image 1 should NOT proceed to
termination and close all of its output files, but should simply hang.

Also, the current specification makes it impossible for a Fortran
compiler to implement coarrays on a basis of MPI. The first paragraph of
the specification of MPI_Abort is:

     This routine makes a "best attempt" to abort all tasks in the group
     of comm. This function does not require that the invoking environment
     take any action with the error code.  However, a Unix or POSIX
     environment should handle this as a return errorcode from the main
     program.

And the first paragraph of the specification of MPI_Finalize is:

     This routine cleans up all MPI state. Each process must call
     MPI_FINALIZE before it exits.  Unless there has been a call to
     MPI_ABORT, each process must ensure that all pending non-blocking
     communications are (locally) complete before calling MPI FINALIZE.

There is no requirement for MPI_Abort to attempt to synchronise with the
other processes, and many implementations do not do so - they merely
request the operating system or job scheduler to kill the MPI job.


PROPOSAL

This is to reorganise the order of the wording now in paragraphs 4 and 7
of 2.3.5, so as to specify the exact process for normal and error
termination.  The new paragraph 4 states that the intent of ALL STOP is
to terminate the program immediately, but leaves it largely unspecified
as to how.

EDITS

[33:24-29] In 2.3.5 "Execution sequence", replace paragraph 4,
"Termination of execution..." by:

   "Termination of execution of a program is either normal termination or
   error termination.  Normal termination occurs only when all images
   initiate normal termination and occurs in three steps: initiation,
   synchronization, and completion.  In this case, all images
   synchronize execution at the second step so that no image starts the
   completion step until all images have finished the initiation step.
   Error termination occurs when any image initiates error termination.
   Once error termination has been initiated on an image, error
   termination is initiated on all images that have not already initiated
   error termination. Termination of execution of the program occurs when
   all images have terminated execution."

[33:30] In 2.3.5  "Execution sequence", first line in paragraph 5, replace
"initiated if" with "initiated when"

[34:2-3] In 2.3.5 "Execution sequence", delete paragraph 7.

[34:3+, Note 2.8] Remove "as quickly as possible" from the end of
the second sentence.

[34:3+, Note 2.9] Change "initiated termination" to
"initiated normal termination"
