                                                            11-166r1
To: J3
From: Nick Maclaren
Subject: Interop TR: second part of notes on type(*) - example A.1.5
Date: 2011 June 1th
Reference: N1854, N1820


There has been a great deal of cross-purposes discussion on many aspects
that come down to people not closely involved in this group
misunderstanding the purpose and intent of type(*).

Arising from this, I still think that example A.1.5 is a really, but
REALLY, bad idea.  Yes, it is possible, but it doesn't even mention the
legion of restrictions, 'gotchas' and even ambiguities that it brings
in.  My main concern is that it will encourage some of the more
knuckle-dragging but intelligent programmers to start using it as a way
of implementing a form of dynamic EQUIVALENCE (and not just for the
Fortran 77 types, either) and - heaven help us! - propagating that view
on the Web, in 'bulletin boards' and even in books.  But perhaps I am
being too cynical ....

Since first writing this, I have reread N1820, and the example actually
conflicts with constraint 2!  Since that document was the formalisation
of the consensus arising from a lot of discussion, we shouldn't include
such an example lightly.

I propose possible edits, but they are very much a matter of taste.  I
am also aware that my views are not universally held, but I do feel that
this matter needs a proper vote in Garching.  I have included two
possible options.

Bill has said that we might prefer to leave the notes out of the
changes to the standard, so that we can provide better ones.  That
is a trivial change, of course, but is semi-orthogonal to this point.
I have included it as a third option, though it can be combined with
the others.


Edits to N1854:
---------------

Option 1:

[34:16-44] Delete example A.1.5.

Option 2:

[34:30+] Append a new paragraph:

"This technique should be used only to create a pointer to a Fortran
object of the same type as the object that the pointer was created from
in the first place, or to create a pointer to a suitable area of memory
that was provided by C.  Any use for treating the storage of one type of
data as if it were another type is undefined in Fortran, usually
undefined in C (see the C99 standard, 6.5 paragraph 6 and elsewhere),
and will cause chaos under at least some compilers."

Option 3:

This can be combined with either of the previous options.

[28:38-40] and [29:1-2] Delete section 6.10.


