                                                     11-203
To: J3
From: John Reid
Subject: Asynchronous communication
Date: 2011 June 15
Reference: WG5/N1847, WG5/N1854, 11-172, 11-183

Discussion

The MPI Forum made this comment in N1847:

"After reading your N1845 working draft from March 3, 2011, we detected
one major gap: there is no standardized possibility of using
nonblocking features of MPI in Fortran programs to overlap computation
with communication.  Specifically, Fortran MPI applications will be
prohibited from initiating any form of asynchronous communication and
then continuing to perform local computations while MPI advances the
communication 'in the background.'

This is a key issue for us because nonblocking communication is a
critical technique for deadlock-free communication and high
performance performance.  An easy use case to describe is one that is
popular in current high performance computing environments: when the
MPI library utilizes hardware offload technologies (such as RDMA) with
a communication co-processor (such as a NIC).

The problem is, in principle, independent of MPI.  It also occurs with
libc/POSIX asynchronous IO (aio), and is therefore a topic that should
be solved by the 'TR on further interoperability of Fortran with C'."

In April, I worked with the interop. email group on edits to the draft
TR re using the ASYNCHRONOUS attribute to support asynchronous
communication. The thread died out after Rolf Rabenseifner appeared to
withdraw the request. I think all he withdrew was the request to use
part of an array for communication while another part was being used
for computation. I am returning to this following the plea by Craig
Rasmussen in 11-183.

Consider the code
    REAL :: buf(100,100)
       : ! Code that involves buf
    CALL MPI_Irecv(buf,...req,...)
       :  ! Code that does not involve buf
    CALL MPI_Wait(req,...)
       :  ! Code that involves buf
Since there is no mention of buf in the call of MPI_Wait, the compiler
is free to perform code motion involving it. For example, it might load
buf into a GPU during the calculations that do not involve buf, ready
for those that do.

Asynchronous communication is so like asynchronous I/O that I think we
need to have the same rules. If we write this into the normative text
of the TR, the effect of giving MPI_Irecv and MPI_Wait the BIND(C)
attribute and adding ASYNCHRONOUS to the declaration of buf in the
above example would be that the compiler will not be allowed to
make the harmful change that I have just outlined.

The rules in the Standard for asynchronous input i/o are slightly
different from the rules for asynchronous output i/o. For example, it is
acceptable to reference an array that is being used for output, but not
if it is being used for input. I think we should maintain this
distinction for asynchronous communication. The programmer knows which is
taking place and therefore which restrictions apply in the calling
procedure. We are anyway not expecting the compiler to diagnose failure
to respect the restrictions.

Van Snyder addresses this problem in 11-172, but has far more edits than
seem appropriate for the TR.

---------------------

Edits to WG5/N1854

4:28+ After NOTE 2.4, add new section

2.4 ASYNCHRONOUS attribute

2.4.1 Introduction

The ASYNCHRONOUS attribute is extended to apply to variables that are
used for asynchronous communication initiated and terminated
by procedures written in C.

2.4.2 Asynchronous communication

Asynchronous communication for a Fortran variable occurs
through the action of procedures defined by means other than Fortran.
It is initiated during an invocation of a procedure from Fortran and
terminated during another invocation of a procedure from Fortran.
During the execution of all statements executed between these
invocations, any variable of which any part is associated with any
part of the asynchronous communication variable is a pending
communication affector.

Asynchronous communication is either input communication or output
communication. For input communication, a pending communication affector
shall not be referenced, become defined, become undefined, become
associated with a dummy argument that has the VALUE attribute, or have
its pointer association status changed. For output communication, a
pending communication affector shall not be redefined, become undefined,
or have its pointer association status changed.

24:23+ Add
In 5.3.4 ASYNCHRONOUS attribute, at the end of paragraph 1, add "or
asynchronous communication (15.5.4)" and at the end of paragraph 2, add
"or a pending communication affector (15.5.4)".

28:37+ Add
Insert subclause 2.4.2 of this Technical Report as subclause
15.5.4 at the end of the existing subclause 15.5.
