To: J3                                                         11-244r2
From: John Reid
Subject: GB 37-39: edits to PDTR 29113
Date: 2011 October 12
Reference: WG5/N1869, WG5/N1881

Discussion

Comment GB37 says that a BIND(C) routine should be prohibited from
having a CONTIGUOUS POINTER dummy argument. This is addressed by the
first edit below.

Comment GB38 says that the passing of a discontiguous array section
from a C routine to a contiguous assumed-shape array dummy argument
should be explicitly stated to be permitted.

Comment GB39 says that it should be explicitly stated that a C routine
whose Fortran interface has a CONTIGUOUS assumed-shape array dummy
must be prepared to handle a discontiguous actual argument itself.

Comments GB38 and GB39 are addressed by the second edit below. The
assumed-rank case is included.

J3 decided that it is desirable for the Fortran processor to handle
this situation if either the caller or the callee is Fortran. A
precedent has been set for deallocating an allocatable array with
intent(out) on entry to a procedure.


Edits to WG5/N1869

In 5.3.8, paragraph 3 bullet item (6) (c), after "or a pointer" insert
"without the CONTIGUOUS attribute".

In 5.3.8, before the final paragraph, add paragraph

"In an invocation of an interoperable procedure whose Fortran interface
has an assumed-shape or assumed-rank dummy argument with the CONTIGUOUS
attribute, the corresponding actual argument may be an array that is
not contiguous or the address of a C descriptor for such an array. If
the procedure is invoked from Fortran or the procedure is a Fortran
procedure, the Fortran processor will handle the difference in
contiguity. If the procedure is invoked from C and the procedure is a
C procedure, the C code within the procedure shall be prepared to
handle the situation of receiving a discontiguous argument."

In 6.9, edits for 15.3.7, para 2, item (5)(c), after "or a pointer"
insert "without the CONTIGUOUS attribute".

In 6.9, edits for 15.3.7, inserting new paragraphs at the end of the
subclause, after para "If a dummy", add paragraph

"In an invocation of an interoperable procedure whose Fortran interface
has an assumed-shape or assumed-rank dummy argument with the CONTIGUOUS
attribute, the corresponding actual argument may be an array that is
not contiguous or the address of a C descriptor for such an array. If
the procedure is invoked from Fortran or the procedure is a Fortran
procedure, the Fortran processor will handle the difference in
contiguity. If the procedure is invoked from C and the procedure is a
C procedure, the C code within the procedure shall be prepared to
handle the situation of receiving a discontiguous argument."
