To: J3                                                         11-244r1
From: John Reid
Subject: GB 37-39: edits to PDTR 29113
Date: 2011 October 11
Reference: WG5/N1869, WG5/N1881

Discussion

Comment GB37 says that a BIND(C) routine should be prohibited from
having a CONTIGUOUS POINTER dummy argument. This is addressed by the
first edit below.

Comment GB38 says that the passing of a discontiguous array section
from a C routine to a contiguous assumed-shape array dummy argument
should be explicitly stated to be permitted.

Comment GB39 says that it should be explicitly stated that a C routine
whose Fortran interface has a CONTIGUOUS assumed-shape array dummy
must be prepared to handle a discontiguous actual argument itself.

Comments GB38 and GB39 are addressed by the second edit below. The
assumed-rank case is included.

GB39 provoked much discussion in subgroup. The alternative is to say 
that a C routine calling a procedure with a CONTIGUOUS assumed-shape 
array dummy must make sure that the actual array is contiguous. 
This version was favoured 4-2-1 in a straw vote. Alternative edits
are provided for this. 


Edits to WG5/N1869

In 5.3.8, paragraph 3 bullet item (6) (c), after "or a pointer" insert
"without the CONTIGUOUS attribute".

In 5.3.8, before the final paragraph, add paragraph

"In an invocation of an interoperable procedure whose Fortran interface
has an assumed-shape or assumed-rank dummy argument with the CONTIGUOUS
attribute, the actual argument may be an array that is not contiguous
or the address of a C descriptor for such an array. If the
invoked procedure is a Fortran procedure, the processor will handle this. 
If the invoked procedure is a C function, the C code within the procedure 
shall construct a contiguous copy."

In 6.9, edits for 15.3.7, para 2, item (5)(c), after "or a pointer"
insert "without the CONTIGUOUS attribute".

In 6.9, edits for 15.3.7, inserting new paragraphs at the end of the
subclause, after para "If a dummy", add paragraph

"In an invocation of an interoperable procedure whose Fortran interface
has an assumed-shape or assumed-rank dummy argument with the CONTIGUOUS
attribute, the actual argument may be an array that is not contiguous
or the address of a C descriptor for such an array. If the
invoked procedure is a Fortran procedure, the processor will handle this. 
If the invoked procedure is a C function, the C code within the procedure 
shall construct a contiguous copy."

Alternative paragraph:

"In a Fortran invocation of an interoperable procedure whose Fortran 
interface has an assumed-shape or assumed-rank dummy argument with the 
CONTIGUOUS attribute, the actual argument may be an array that is not 
contiguous. In a C invocation of such a procedure, the invoking C code 
shall ensure that the actual argument is contiguous."






