To: J3                                                   12-123r2
From: Bill Long
Subject: Edits to 12-119
Date: 2012 February 14
References: 12-119


Suggestion from 12-123 that was not adopted:

------
Page 10, NOTE 5.3. Change
"the corresponding formal parameter is the address of a descriptor of
type CFI_cdesc_t (8.7). The rank member of the descriptor provides the
rank of the actual argument."
to
"the corresponding formal parameter is the address of a descriptor of
type CFI_cdesc_t (8.7) for the effective argument. The rank member of
the descriptor provides the rank."
Reason: The C descriptor describes the effective argument, rather than
the actual argument, see top of page 31. Let's also take the opportunity
to say here that it describes the effective argument. Page 31 is a bit
late, though it is mentioned for assumed-type and assumed-rank on page
9.

Explanation: The current text is not incorrect. Also, the "Reason"
comment is not quite right.  The descriptor members come from the
effective argument except for the attribute which is determined by the
corresponding dummy argument in the Fortran interface.  For example,
if the actual argument were allocatable and the interface were
assumed-shape, the attribute member in the descriptor would be
CFI_attribute_other, and not CFI_attribute_allocatable.  The proposed
added text could lead to confusion on this issue.  Note that the text
at the top of page 31 is defective - an edit in a different paper will
fix that.



Edits to 12-119:

8.2 C descriptors:

In the second sentence, change 

"a nonallocatable nonpointer data object of known shape, or an
assumed-size array"

to

"or a nonallocatable nonpointer object that is scalar or is an array of
assumed-shape, explicit-shape, or assumed-size array".

{The term "known shape" is not defined and the list of alternatives
using defined terms is short.}

--------------------

8.3.4 Macros, in the paragraph following Table 8.1 (page 20):

In the second sentence change

"CFI_attribute_other specifies an assumed-shape array, a
nonallocatable nonpointer scalar, an assumed-size array, or an array
that is argument associated with an assumed-size array."

 to

"CFI_attribute_other specifies a nonallocatable nonpointer object that
is scalar or is an assumed-shape, explicit-shape, or assumed-size
array."

{If the C descriptor corresponds to a Fortran interface dummy that is
assumed-shape and the corresponding actual argument is explicit-shape,
the C descriptor actually describes the actual argument. Should make
the wording here and in subclause 8.2 similar.}

--------------------

In 8.7 Interoperability of procedures and procedure interfaces, in the
penultimate para (page 31), line 2, Change "corresponding actual" to
"associated effective".

{If the actual argument is a pointer, and the effective argument the
target of that pointer, the C descriptor describes the effective
argument.}
