To: J3                                                12-183r3
From: Dan Nagle
Subject: Minor Features List for f1x
Date: 2012 October 17

This paper is to start the list of suggestions for topics
to be considered as "warts" to be addressed in Fortran 1x,
in furtherance of WG5's plans for future development.

It is subgroup's intention that the items discussed below
be discussed in plenary for suitability as work items,
and that these items be removed if found to be inappropriate,
and that other items be added when found to be consistent
with WG5's Markham resolutions.

This is a meeting document rather than a standing document
as the next meeting of J3 must write a final list for forwarding
to WG5 by the next meeting of WG5.

Item 1
The g0 edit descriptor had a ".d" added in response
to public comments as a part of Fortran 2008.  The requirement
is that ".d" (where is this stated in 10-007r1 ?) be
absent when the list item is not real or complex should be
eliminated to make it optional and ignored when the list item
is not real or complex.  A specific behavior should
be selected for interpretation of ".d" when used with g0
and the list item is of type integer, logical, or character.

Straw Vote:  Is this appropriate for inclusion in f1x?

Appropriate/Inappropriate/Undecided = 6/0/1 => Yes, this makes g0 more useful

Straw Vote:  If so, what is the behavior of g0.d in all cases?

No straw vote was taken; this discussion is deferred.

Item 2
An attribute that requires a separate instance of a local entity
for each instance of a procedure would be useful when
a pure procedure is referenced from a do concurrent.  Also,
it would provide documentation for local entities
in recursive procedures.  Many processors support an automatic
declaration now.  Adding this to the standard would therefore
promote portability of programs and reduce diagnostics
when standards-conformance-checking has been selected.

Straw Vote:  Is this appropriate for inclusion in f1x?

No straw vote was taken but this item was discussed.

No, this is unnecessary.  Please see 12.6.2.4p1 pg. 308 of 10-007r1.

Item 3
Many edit descriptors have w=0 meaning a "minimum width" field.
When a character is printed using 'a' format, often the trim()
intrinsic is applied.  Since trim() is transformational,
it cannot be applied to a whole array, but must be applied
to each element individually.  Thus, a format descriptor
that means "trim the character item and then apply 'a' format"
would be useful.  This might be called 'a0'.

Straw Vote:  Is this appropriate for inclusion in f1x?

A/I/U = 4/1/2 => Yes, this gives a useful meaning to a0

Item 4
Processors are required to have the ability to report the appearance
of an intrinsic procedure not described in the standard.
Fortran 2003 added intrinsic modules.  Processors are not
required to report the use of non-standard intrinsic modules,
nor of non-standard entities from standard intrinsic modules.
Doing so would aid standards-conformance checking of programs.

Straw Vote:  Is this appropriate for inclusion in f1x?

A/I/U = 7/0/0 => Yes, this will aid standards checking of programs

Item 5
Nested scopes were expanded greatly with f90, and further with f95,
f03 and f08.  But there is no means to control host association
except declaration of a similarly-named entity in the nested scope
(at least, for most nested scopes).  Thus, a means to specify
that a name, names, or all names from the host are not
to be available within the nested scope would be helpful.

Straw Vote:  Is this appropriate for inclusion in f1x?

A/I/U = 4/0/2 => Yes, this is requested of vendors
