To:        J3                                      13-232r1
From:      Bill Long and John Reid
Subject:   Coarray events
Date: 2013 February 13
Reference: WG5/N1930, 12-201

1. Discussion
-------------

This paper proposes syntax and semantics for coarray events.

2. Requirements (copied from N1930)
-----------------------------------

NOTIFY and QUERY statements were proposed in N1858.  That proposal
matches execution of a NOTIFY statement on one image with execution of
a QUERY statement on another image based on the number of times the
statements are executed on each image.  That mechanism is not robust
in the presence of code reordering.  For example, an image that would
otherwise be idle might bring other work forward.  Event variables
provide a more robust mechanism for synchronizing execution of images.
Event variables allow library routines to use synchronization in a way
that is hidden from and does not interfere with the calling code.

E1: There should be a mechanism to allow one-sided ordering of
    execution segments. For example, suppose image I executes
    successive segments I1 and I2 and image J executes successive
    segments J1 and J2; there might be a need for I1 to precede J2,
    but no need for J1 to precede I2.

E2: The mechanism should use a data entity that is accessible by all
    the images to identify the event. There shall be a type for event
    variables, probably an opaque derived type defined in the
    intrinsic module ISO_FORTRAN_ENV.

E3: Mechanisms shall be provided to post an event, to test if an event
    has been posted, and to wait for an event to be posted. Repeated
    posts to the same event variable increment a counter internal to
    the event variable and waits decrement the counter.  The statements
    implementing event post and wait are image control statements. The
    test operation may be implemented by an inquiry function and hence
    would not be an image control statement.

E4: If multiple event wait operations are waiting on the same event
    variable, which of those operations completes when the
    corresponding event post occurs is unspecified.


3. Modifications to the requirements

We have kept to the requirements except as follows:

E3. A subroutine is used to return the event count, with an optional
argument to indicate whether the call was successful.

E4. Replaced by the requirement that each wait be on a local event
variable and each post be to a coindexed event variable. 


4. Syntax and Semantics
-----------------------

An image can use an EVENT POST statement to notify another image that it
can proceed to work on tasks that use common resources.  Images can
wait on events posted by other images and can query if images have
posted events.

EVENT_TYPE is a derived type with private components; no component is
allocatable or a pointer. It is an extensible type with no type
parameters. All components have default initialization.  The type
is defined in the ISO_FORTRAN_ENV intrinsic module.

A scalar coarray variable of type EVENT_TYPE is an event variable. An
event variable includes a count of the difference between the number of
successful posts and successful waits for the event variable. The
initial value of the count of an event variable is zero.

A successful post to an event variable increments its count. If the
count is zero for a wait statement, the executing image shall wait 
until the count is positive. A successful wait for an event variable 
decrements its count. Unsuccessful posts and waits shall not 
change the count.

Two new statements and a new intrinsic subroutine are provided for
event variables.  The statements are

     EVENT POST(event-variable [, sync-stat-list] )

and

     EVENT WAIT(event-variable [, sync-stat-list] )

EVENT POST posts to an <event-variable> that is coindexed and EVENT WAIT 
waits on <event-variable> that is not coindexed.

The new statements are image control statements.

An event variable shall not appear in a variable definition context
except as the <event-variable> in an EVENT POST or EVENT WAIT
statement, as an <allocate-object> in an ALLOCATE statement without a
SOURCE= <alloc-opt>, or as an actual argument in a reference to a
procedure with an explicit interface where the corresponding dummy
argument has INTENT(INOUT).  A variable with a subobject of type
EVENT_TYPE shall not appear in a variable definition context except as
an <allocate-object> in an ALLOCATE statement without a SOURCE=
<alloc-opt> or as an actual argument in a reference to a procedure
with an explicit interface where the corresponding dummy argument has
INTENT(INOUT).

The new intrinsic subroutine is

     EVENT_QUERY ( EVENT, COUNT [,STATUS] )

On a successful call, COUNT is given the value of the count of EVENT,
and STATUS is given the value 0. On an unsuccessful call, STATUS is
given a processor-dependent nonzero value. A call does not constitute
an image control statement.

A processor shall complete execution of all segments of an image that
precede an EVENT POST statement before executing the statement.  A
processor shall not start execution of segments of an image that
follow an EVENT WAIT statement until after the statement has been
executed.  A processor may execute portions of segments of images
that follow an EVENT POST statement before executing the statement
provided the effect of the sequential execution of the segments of
the image is not changed.  A processor may defer execution of portions
of segments of images that precede an EVENT WAIT statement until after
the statement is executed, provided the effect of the sequential
execution of the segments of the image is not changed.


5. Edits to J3/12-201
---------------------

----------------------------------
[5:7+] Add terms

3.2
<<event variable>>
scalar coarray variable of type EVENT_TYPE (6.2) from the intrinsic 
module ISO_FORTRAN_ENV.



----------------------------------
[11] Replace this page by the following

6. Events

6.1 Introduction

An image can use an EVENT POST statement to notify another image that it
can proceed to work on tasks that use common resources.  An image can
wait on events posted by other images and can query if images have
posted events.

6.2 EVENT_TYPE

EVENT_TYPE is a derived type with private components; no component is
allocatable or a pointer. It is an extensible type with no type
parameters.  All components have default initialization.

A scalar variable of type EVENT_TYPE is an event variable.  An event
variable includes a count of the difference between number of
successful posts and successful waits for the event variable. The
initial value of the event count of an event variable is zero.

An event variable shall be a coarray and shall not appear in a
variable definition context except as the <event-variable> in an EVENT
POST or EVENT WAIT statement, as an <allocate-object> in an ALLOCATE
statement without a SOURCE= <alloc-opt>, or as an actual argument in a
reference to a procedure with an explicit interface where the
corresponding dummy argument has INTENT(INOUT).  A variable with a
subobject of type EVENT_TYPE shall not appear in a variable definition
context except as an <allocate-object> in an ALLOCATE statement
without a SOURCE= <alloc-opt> or as an actual argument in a reference
to a procedure with an explicit interface where the corresponding
dummy argument has INTENT(INOUT).


6.3 EVENT POST

The EVENT POST statement provides a way to post an event.

R601 event-post-stmt  is  EVENT POST(event-variable [, sync-stat-list] )

C601 (R601) The event-variable shall be of the type EVENT_TYPE defined 
in the ISO_FORTRAN_ENV intrinsic module and shall be coindexed.

A successful post to an event variable increments its count. 
An unsuccessful post does not change the count.

A processor shall complete execution of all segments of an image that
precede an EVENT POST statement before executing the statement.  A
processor may execute portions of segments of images that follow an
EVENT POST statement before executing the statement provided the
effect of the sequential execution of the segments of the image is not
changed.

6.4 EVENT WAIT

The EVENT WAIT statement provides a way to wait until an event is
posted.

R602 event-wait-stmt  is  EVENT WAIT(event-variable [, sync-stat-list] )

C602 (R602)  The event-variable shall be of the type EVENT_TYPE defined 
in the ISO_FORTRAN_ENV intrinsic module and shall not be coindexed.

If the count of the event-variable is zero, the executing image shall wait 
until the count is positive. A successful wait for an event variable 
decrements its count. Unsuccessful posts and waits shall not 
change the count.

A processor shall not start execution of segments of an image that
follow an EVENT WAIT statement until after the statement has been
executed. A processor may defer execution of portions of segments of
images that precede an EVENT WAIT statement until after the statement
is executed, provided the effect of the sequential execution of the
segments of the image is not changed.

 ----------------------------------
[17:44+] Add a new intrinsic subroutine

7.3.10a  EVENT_QUERY ( EVENT, COUNT [,STATUS] )

Description. Query the count of an event variable.

Class. 	Subroutine.

Arguments.

EVENT shall be scalar and of type EVENT_TYPE defined in the
      ISO_FORTRAN_ENV intrinsic module. It is an INTENT(IN) argument.

COUNT shall be scalar and of type default integer. It is an INTENT(OUT)
      argument. If the call is successful, COUNT becomes defined with
      the difference between number of successful posts and successful
      waits for EVENT. Otherwise, it is given the value 0.

STATUS (optional) shall be scalar and of type integer. It is an
      INTENT(OUT) argument. It becomes defined with value 0 if the
      call is successful and to a processor-defined nonzero value if
      the call is unsuccessful.

Example. If EVENT is an event variable for which there have been no
      successful posts or waits, after the invocation

          CALL EVENT_QUERY ( EVENT, COUNT )

      the integer variable COUNT has the value 0. If there have been
      10 successful posts and 2 successful waits to EVENT[2], after 
      the invocation

          CALL EVENT_QUERY ( EVENT[2], COUNT )

      COUNT has the value 8.

------------------------------------
[19:9+] Add two new subclauses

"8.2a Edits to clause 1

{In 1.3 Terms and definitions insert new terms}

[Text for the terms in clause 3 of the TS go here, with new subclause
numbers and corrected references.]

 8.2b Edits to clause 8

{In 8.5.1 Image control statements, paragraph 2}

Add extra bullet point:

    " o EVENT POST and EVENT WAIT"


{Following 8.5.2 Segments, insert two new subclauses}

Move 6.3 EVENT POST of this Technical Specification to become
subclause 8.5.2a of F2008.

Move 6.4 EVENT WAIT of this Technical Specification to become
subclause 8.5.2b of F2008.
"
------------------------------------
[19:29+] Add to the existing edit for Table 13.1:

"EVENT_QUERY (EVENT,COUNT[,STATUS])       S  count of an event."


------------------------------------
[20:2+] Add new edits to clause 13

{In 13.8.2 The ISO_FORTRAN_ENV intrinsic module}

Move the paragraph of subclause 6.2 of this Technical
Specification to become subclause 13.8.2.8a of F2008.



