                                                             J3/13-213

To: J3
From: Van Snyder
Subject: Optional arguments for operator or assignment procedures
Date: 2013 December 19
References: 04-187; 2004 hate-dislike-like-love score 0-0-9-2

Title: Optional arguments for operator or assignment procedures

Submitted by: Van Snyder

Status: For consideration

Basic functionality: Allow procedures that define operators or
assignment to have optional arguments.

Rationale: Reduces the need to write wrappers, and thereby long-term
cost.

Estimated impact: Minor

Markham M6 conformance: Remove simple deficiency and discrepancy.

Detailed specification: Allow procedures that define operators or
assignment to have optional arguments.

Draft edits: To estimate scope of project

Replace 12.4.3.4.2p1:

"If OPERATOR is specified in a generic specification, all of the
procedures in the generic interface shall be functions that can be
referenced as defined operations (7.1.6, 12.5).  OPERATOR shall not be
specified for functions with no arguments.  If a function is referenced
using prefix operator notation, the operand corresponds to the first
dummy argument, and any dummy arguments after the first shall be
optional.  If a function is referenced using infix operator notation, it
shall have at least two arguments, the first operand corresponds to the
first dummy argument, the second operand corresponds to the second dummy
argument, and any dummy arguments after the second shall be optional.  A
dummy argument to which an operand is associated shall be a dummy data
object with INTENT(IN).  \obs{The function result shall not have assumed
character length.}  If the operator is an <intrinsic-operator> (R309),
the number of dummy arguments shall not be less than the number required
for intrinsic uses of that operator, and the types, kind type
parameters, or ranks of the dummy arguments that correspond to operands
shall differ from those required for the intrinsic operation (7.1.5)."

{ The rules for generic resolution already handle optional arguments if
  the procedure is referenced as a <function-reference>. }

Replace first two sentences of 12.4.3.4.3p2:

"Each of these subroutines shall have at least two dummy arguments.  The
first two dummy arguments shall be dummy data objects.  The first shall
have INTENT(OUT) or INTENT(INOUT) and the second shall have INTENT(IN).
Any dummy arguments after the second shall be optional."

{ The rules for generic resolution already handle optional arguments if
  the procedure is referenced as a <subroutine-reference>. }
