To:      J3                                    13-264
From:    Bill Long, John Reid
Subject: Form subteams
Date:    19 June 2013
References: N1967, N1968, N1971

Discussion
----------

In his ballot comments (N1971), Reinhold Bader has drawn attention to
deficiencies in the FORM SUBTEAMS statement:

1. It is not made clear that the intention is that all the images of
the current team must participate in corresponding FORM SUBTEAMS
statements.

2. It is not made clear that the intention is that corresponding
FORM SUBTEAMS statements must participate with corresponding team
variables. For example, it was not intended that a team be formed
by some images of the current team executing
        FORM SUBTEAMS(I,TEAM(1))
and the rest executing
        FORM SUBTEAMS(I,TEAM(2))

3. It is desirable for a team to be defined by data that is spread
over the set of its team variables on all its images. Data that
aids efficient execution as a team can be established during the
execution of FORM SUBTEAMS.

4. It is not clear how SYNC TEAMS can work unless it is restricted
to teams that are unchanged since they last participated in a
CHANGE TEAMS construct, because each team is defined by the values of
the subteam-ids on the images of its parent team and identifying it
is a collective calculation involving the parent team.

Reinhold suggests that the FORM SUBTEAMS statement be replaced by
a collective subroutine. This idea has been discussed by the
subgroup and rejected. The main reasons were that an intrinsic
subroutine can be overridden by the user, leading to confusing code;
and there is symmetry with having FORM SUBTEAM and CHANGE TEAM both
statements.

The edits suggested here are intended to remedy the problems directly.

Additionally, missing edits are provided for issues related to team
variables:

1) The team variable in a FORM SUBTEAM statement appears in a variable
definition context. An edit in clause 8 is supplied for this.

2) Variables of type TEAM_TYPE should have restrictions similar to
those of type LOCK_TYPE. Edits for subclause 5.2 are supplied for
this.



Edits to N1967:
---------------

[9:21+] Add two constraints to 5.2 TEAM_TYPE:

"C501 A team variable shall not appear in a variable definition
     context except as the <team-variable> in a FORM SUBTEAM
     statement, as an <allocate-object>, or as an actual argument in a
     reference to a procedure with an explicit interface where the
     corresponding dummy argument has INTENT (INOUT).

C502 A variable with a subobject of type TEAM_TYPE shall not have the
     POINTER attribute and shall not appear in  a variable definition
     context except as an allocate-object or as an actual argument in
     a reference to a procedure with an explicit interface where the
     corresponding dummy argument has INTENT (INOUT)."

[10:22+] Add paragraph: "If the FORM SUBTEAM statement is executed on
one one image, it shall be executed by the same statement on all
images of the current team in execution segments that are not ordered
with respect to each other.  If <team-variable> contains any
subscripts, the values of each shall be the same on all these
statements.  From the beginning of execution of the current team, the
sequence of executions of FORM SUBTEAM statements shall be the same on
all images of the current team."

[10:30+] Add paragraph:

"The value of <team-variable> shall be unchanged since a successful
execution of a FORM SUBTEAM statement on the current team."

[30:17+] Add new subclause:

" 8.6a Edits to clause 16

{At the end of the list of variable definition contexts in 16.6.7p1,
replace the "." at the end of entry (15) with ";" and add a new entry
as follows}

(16) a <team-variable> in a FORM SUBTEAM statement;
"
