To:      J3                                                 13-290
From:    John Reid
Subject: POST/WAIT changes 
Date:    26 June 2013
References: N1967, N1968, N1971

Discussion
----------

In N1971, Malcolm Cohen says:

6.4 says
"If the count of a event variable increases through the execution of an 
EVENT POST statement on image M and later decreases through the 
execution of an EVENT WAIT statement on image T, the segments preceding 
the EVENT POST statement on image M precede the segments following the 
EVENT WAIT statement on image T." which is all very well, but the very 
definition of "later" can only be interpreted as have segments already 
ordered, i.e. it is assuming a stronger fact than the result that it 
requires.
Consider
  image 1 segment i does POST EVENT(x)
  image 2 segment j does POST EVENT(x)
  image 3 segment k does WAIT EVENT(x)
for unordered segments i, j, k;
then image 3 segment k+1 follows image 1 segment i or image 2 segment
j, but which?  Both? 

It is intended that the count of an event variable be modified 
atomically in much the same way as a lock variable. Just as a lock 
variable goes through a sequence of locked and unlocked states, see 
F2008, 8.5.6, para 5, so the count of an event variable goes through 
a sequence of values each differing from its predecessor by 1 or -1. 
It is the position in this sequence that it being referenced by the 
word "later".

When image i posts an event on image k, it is signalling that the 
action of the preceding segment is complete and that image k can
start its related task. If image j posts similarly on image k, it too
is indicating that its action is complete. If both of these posts 
arrive on image k before it has executed waits for them the wait count
will increase by 2. When the wait count next decreases, it is certain
that both images i and j have completed their actions. Therefore, the
answer to Malcolm's question is "both".

Edits are provided for these points.

Edits to N1967:
---------------  

[14:7-11]. In line 7, add "a sequence of" before "EVENT POST" and in
line 9 after "later" add  "in the sequence". The whole paragraph then
reads

"During the execution of the program, the count of a event variable is 
changed by the execution of a sequence of EVENT POST and EVENT WAIT 
statements. If the count of a event variable increases through the 
execution of an EVENT POST statement on image M and later in the 
sequence decreases through the execution of an EVENT WAIT statement 
on image T, the segments preceding the EVENT POST statement on image 
M precede the segments following the EVENT WAIT statement on image T."

[14:7-11+].  Add note:

NOTE 
The segment that follows the execution of an EVENT WAIT statement is 
ordered with respect to all the segments that precede EVENT POST 
statements that caused prior changes in the sequence of values
of the event variable. 


 
