                                                            J3/13-298
To: J3
From: Van Snyder
Subject: Interp on VOLATILE in specification expressions
Date: 2013 July 9

----------------------------------------------------------------------

NUMBER: TBD
TITLE: VOLATILE in specification expressions
KEYWORD: VOLATILE, specification expression
DEFECT TYPE: Clarification or erratum?
STATUS: J3 consideration in progress

QUESTION:

Is the following subprogram required always to print "T T"?

  subroutine Wobbly ( N )
    integer, volatile :: N
    integer :: A ( n, n )
    integer :: B ( n * n )
    print *, size(a) == size(b), size(a,1) == size(a,2)
  end subroutine Wobbly

ANALYSIS

Subclause 5.2.2, paragraph 2, says, in part

  "If a type parameter ... is defined by an expression that is not a
  constant expression, the ... value is established on entry to a
  procedure defined by the subprogram, or on execution of the BLOCK
  statement...."

Subclause 5.3.8.2, paragraph 2, says, in part

  "The bounds, and hence shape, are determined on entry to a procedure
  defined by the subprogram, or on execution of the BLOCK statement,
  by evaluating the bounds' expressions."

This could be interpreted to mean that a processor is required to take
a snapshot of variables that appear in specification expressions when
the subprogram is invoked or the BLOCK statement is executed, and use
that same value in all appearances of that variable in all
specification expressions in that scoping unit.

On the other hand, NOTE 5.25 in subclause 5.3.19 states that a
"Fortran processor should use the most recent definition of a volatile
object when a value is required."  This could be interpreted to mean
that a processor should fetch a value for the variable each time it
appears within a specification expression.  Further, subclause
7.1.5.2.4, paragraph 2, permits a processor to apply mathematically
equivalent transformations, such as replacing N+N by 2*N, which
changes the number of references.  NOTE 5.25 is a suggestion, not a
requirement, and certainly not a prohibition.

Therefore, the standard does not specify whether the subprogram is
always required to print "T T", or the effect is processor dependent.

ANSWER 1

Subclause 5.2.2, paragraph 2, requires that length type parameter
values that are not defined by a constant expression be established on
entry to a procedure, or on execution of a BLOCK statement.  Subclause
5.3.8.2, paragraph 2, requires that a processor determine the bounds,
and hence shape, of explicit-shape arrays on entry to a procedure, or
when a BLOCK statement is executed.  The requirements on the BLOCK
statement do not allow a processor any latitude to evaluate the bounds
little-by-little, in whatever order it chooses to evaluate
specification expressions within the specification part of the
construct.  The requirement "on entry to a a procedure" is less
precise, but, for consistency, also ought not to allow this latitude. 
That is, a processor is required to take a "snapshot" of each volatile
variable that appears within the specification part, before the
specification part is elaborated, and use that value throughout
elaboration of the specification part.

The subprogram is therefore required to print "T T".

EDITS 1

Within subclause 5.3.19, after paragraph 4 [120:23+], insert a
paragraph:

  "The value of a volatile variable that appears within the
  <specification-part> of a procedure shall be established when the
  procedure is invoked, and that value shall be used throughout
  evaluation of expressions within that <specification-part>.  The
  value of a volatile variable that appears within the
  <specification-part> of a BLOCK construct shall be established when
  the BLOCK statement is executed, and that value shall be used
  throughout evaluation of expressions within that
  <specification-part>.  Once established, the value that is used to
  evaluate specification expressions is not affected if the value of
  the variable changes by means not specified by the program."

{Remove any possibility of conflict with subclauses 5.2.2 and
5.3.8.2.}

Within NOTE 5.25, replace "The Fortran processor" with "Within the
<execution-part> of a subprogram or BLOCK construct, the Fortran
processor".

ANSWER 2

Subclause 2.3.5, paragraph 2, states that specification expressions
within the specification part of a procedure are evaluated in a
processor dependent order.  Subclause 8.1.4, paragraph 3, states that
specification expressions within the specification part of a BLOCK
construct are evaluated in a processor dependent order.  Subclause
7.1.5.2.4, paragraph 2, allows a processor to evaluate a
mathematically equivalent numeric expression, such as replacing N+N
with 2*N, which might affect the number of references to a volatile
variable.  NOTE 5.25 within subclause 5.3.19 urges (but does not
requre) a Fortran processor to "use the most recent definition of a
volatile object."

Therefore, it is processor dependent whether the subprogram will
always print "T T".  Edits are provided to warn about potentially
curious behavior, and to mention the processor dependency in Annex A.

EDITS 2

Within subclause 5.2.2, paragraph 2 [88:36-37], replace "the type
parameter value..., and is not affected":

  "the type parameter value is established by evaluation of the
   expression after the procedure defined by the subprogram is invoked
   or after the BLOCK statement is executed, and before the first
   executable construct of the <execution-part>, if any, is executed. 
   The value is not affected"

{Remove apparent conflict between 2.3.5p2 and 5.2.2p2.}

Within subclause 5.3.8.2, paragraph 2 [94:20-21], replace the second
sentence:

  "The bounds, and hence shape, are determined by evaluation of
   specification expressions within the <specification-part> of the
   subprogram or BLOCK construct, in processor-dependent order, after
   the procedure defined by the subprogram is invoked or after the
   BLOCK statement is executed, and before the first executable
   construct of the <execution-part>, if any, is executed."

{Remove apparent conflict between 2.3.5p2 and 5.3.8.2p2.}

After Note 5.25 in subclause 5.3.19 [102:24-], insert a note:

  "NOTE 5.25a
     Subclause 5.3.8.2 specifies that the bounds and hence shape of
     explicit-shape arrays, are determined upon entry to a procedure,
     or when a BLOCK statement is executed.  If a variable with the
     VOLATILE attribute appears in a specification expression,
     however, a processor is encouraged to use the most recent
     definition.  The order of evaluation of specification
     expressions, and whether mathematically equivalent
     transformations are performed, are not specified by this
     standard.  Therefore, it is processor dependent whether its value
     in that expression is necessarily the same as its value in
     another specification expression.  If it appears more than once
     within a single specification expression, it is processor
     dependent whether its values at those separate appearances are
     necessarily the same."

In the first list item in subclause A.2 [459:16], insert ", 5.3.8.2"
after "2.3.5".

In subclause A.2, in subclause order [459:38+], insert a list item:

  "o for purposes of evaluating specification expressions, whether a
     processor accesses a volatile variable once when a procedure is
     invoked, or separately for different appearances of that volatile
     variable;"

In the list item in subclause A.2 concerning subclause 8.1.4 [460:21],
insert "5.3.8.2," before "8.1.4".

SUBMITTED BY: Van Snyder

HISTORY: m202  13-nnn  Submitted

----------------------------------------------------------------------
