                                                            J3/13-238r1

To: J3
From: Malcolm Cohen
Subject: Control of host association
Date: 2013 February 12

1. Introduction

We have frequently been asked for "better" control over host association.
Indeed, this is one of the problematic items identified by the WG23
vulnerabilities annex (as "YOW").


2. Requirements

To extend host association so as to be able to control both importation
and "shadowing" (hiding a host entity).

Unlike use association, host association can only import entities from
(or through) a single host scope, so there is no need for the renaming
facility of use association.


3. Specifications

(a) To be able to specify that an entity is host-associated.
(b) To be able to limit host association to a specific list of names;
    this shall include the empty set.
(c) To be able to prevent inadvertent "shadowing" of host names.
(d) No renaming.


4. Syntax

(a) Allow IMPORT to be used in a hosted subprogram or BLOCK construct,
    not just in interface bodies.  But not in derived types or in any
    other construct.

(b) Add an "ONLY" clause to IMPORT.  To avoid confusion, if any IMPORT
    statement in a scoping unit has an "ONLY" clause, all the IMPORT
    statements in that scoping unit shall have ONLY clauses.

    Although "IMPORT,ONLY:" specifying no entities would appear to satisfy
    the requirement for preventing import, it does not do so clearly as a
    subsequent "IMPORT,ONLY: ..." might extend that empty set.  Therefore
    a specific "IMPORT,NONE" statement should be added; if an IMPORT,NONE
    statement appears in a scoping unit, no other IMPORT statement shall
    appear in that scoping unit.

(c) Add an "IMPORT,ALL", which explicitly imports every host entity; it
    differs from a blank "IMPORT" (or the default host association) which
    only imports entities that are not locally declared.  An entity
    imported with IMPORT,ALL shall not be declared locally except to have
    the ASYNCHRONOUS or VOLATILE attribute.

<import-stmt> ::= IMPORT [[ :: ] <import-name-list> ]
               |  IMPORT, ONLY : <import-name-list>
               |  IMPORT, NONE
               |  IMPORT, ALL

The prohibitions listed in (a)-(c) shall be constraints.


5. Estimated impact

On standard: minor.
On processors: relatively minor but not trivial.
Conformance with Markham resolution:
  arguably yes, improves feature consistency vis-a-vis use association.

===END===
