To: J3                                            J3/13-315
From: Dan Nagle
Subject: upload process
Date: 2013 September 0

There is a new upload process in place which has
a single upload page for meeting documents and standing
documents.  The page supports ordinary text files and
files formatted such as pdf, html, xls, and so on.

For all files the index of papers (the paper paper) for a meeting
is updated with an entry for the paper.  For text files,
the necessary information is taken from the uploaded
paper itself.  For papers in another format, the information
is taken from an existing entry in the paper paper
with the same paper number.

The type of paper is determined from the name of the upload
paper, as follows:  If the file name suffix is not txt,
the paper is assumed to be formatted.  To upload a formatted
paper, first upload a template paper (downloadable from
a link on the upload page), edit it appropriately, and
upload it.  This creates the entry in the paper paper.
In the template paper, lines with a # in column one are elided.

For a meeting paper, keep the template name template.txt.
For a standing document, change the name to be the correct
name for the standing document (for example, 13-001r2.txt).

If the file name is of the form yy-nnn, where yy is the year
of the meeting and nnn is an existing paper number (nnn >= 100),
the paper is treated as a revision of the existing paper,
and as assigned the next highest revision number.  The number must
exist in the paper paper.

If the file name is yy-0nn, the file is assumed to be
a standing document.  Standing documents must have the correct
revision number in the name (because the previous revision
may be in a different paper paper).

To upload a formatted meeting paper, first upload the template,
keeping the name template.txt, to get your paper number.
Then upload your formatted paper with the correct name,
for example, 13-135.pdf (assuming you were assigned 135 in year 13
when you uploaded the template paper.  The entry in the paper
paper is taken from the entry generated by uploading
the template.

To upload a formatted standing document, first upload
the template, renaming it to the correct standing document
number.  Then you may upload the formatted version and
the entry in the paper paper is taken from the entry made
when the template was uploaded.  The formatted file must have
a name that will match the entry in the paper paper.

In the uploaded text paper, if a line starts with "Reference:",
what follows will be copied into the paper paper entry
below the subject.

The author's name in the paper paper is the final non-blank string
following the last embedded blank.  Thus, "Batson D. Belfry"
will be listed as author of "Belfry",
while "Marinus van der Lubbe" will be listed
as an author of "Lubbe".

Multiple authors should be separated by & signs.  Otherwise,
the author string is treated as one author.  Thus, authors
"Bill Long & John Reid" will be listed as "Long & Reid", while
authors "Bill Long and John Reid" will be listed as "Reid".

If the committee approves this process, I will merge this paper
with the standing 013 to create a new standing 013.

For clarity, some examples (taken from an email) follow:

Malcolm wants to upload a new interp, so he uploads mc-intrp.txt.
A document number is generated and an entry is made in the paper paper.
The uploaded file has the paper number and date set.

Van wants to revise 13-312.txt, so he uploads 13-312.txt
and is assigned paper number 13-312r1.  If Van wants another revision,
he can upload 13-312.txt again, and it will get 13-312r2.txt.

Bill wants to upload a new draft of the TS, so he downloads
the template.txt, edits it (from and subject) and uploads template.txt.
He then uploads the yy-nnn.pdf with yy-nnn being the file name generated.

Stan wants to upload a new 001, so he uploads 13-001r?.txt where ?
is the correct revision.

Malcolm wants to upload a new 13-018.pdf, so he downloads the template,
edits it (from, subject, and maybe reference), renames it on his
computer to 13-018.txt, and uploads it (to put an entry
in the paper paper).  He then uploads 13-018.pdf,
and the paper paper information is copied from the entry
for 13-018.txt (from, subject, and maybe reference).
