                                                             J3/14-154
To:      J3
From:    Van Snyder
Subject: Interp concerning LOCK_TYPE
Date: 2014 May 20

----------------------------------------------------------------------

NUMBER: TBD
TITLE: LOCK_TYPE, ultimate components, subcomponents, and coarrays
KEYWORD: LOCK_TYPE, ultimate components, subcomponents, coarrays
DEFECT TYPE: Erratum
STATUS: J3 consideration in progress

DISCUSSION:

Constraint C433 in subclause 4.5.2.1 reads:

C433 (R425) If EXTENDS appears and the type being defined has an
  ultimate component of type LOCK_TYPE from the intrinsic module ISO
  FORTRAN ENV, its parent type shall have an ultimate component of type
  LOCK TYPE.

This was intended to prevent compromising protection of objects of type
LOCK_TYPE by using type extension and polymorphism.

According to subclause 1.3.33.4, an ultimate component is a

  component that is of intrinsic type, a pointer, or allocatable; or an
  ultimate component of a nonpointer nonallocatable component of derived
  type

The type LOCK_TYPE is not intrinsic.  Therefore, if a type has a
nonallocatable component of type LOCK_TYPE, it does not have an ultimate
component of type LOCK_TYPE.  Therefore, constraint C433 fails to
protect entities of type LOCK_TYPE.

Constraint C433 prohibits reasonable constructions, such as extending
the type LOCK_TYPE, or extending a type that has an allocatable
component that has a component of type LOCK_TYPE, because the parent
type does not have an ultimate component of type LOCK_TYPE.

Constraint C1302 in subclause 13.8.2.16 reads:

C1302 A named variable of type LOCK TYPE shall be a coarray. A named
  variable with a noncoarray subcomponent of type LOCK TYPE shall be a
  coarray.

This was intended to require that components of type LOCK_TYPE, at any
level of component selection, be coarrays.

According to subclause 1.3.33.3, a subcomponent is a

  <structure> direct component that is a subobject of a structure

According to subclause 1.3.33.1, a direct component is

  one of the components, or one of the direct components of a nonpointer
  nonallocatable component.

The definition of the term "subcomponent" does not include components of
allocatable components.  Therefore, because of the use of the term
"subcomponent," if an object has an allocatable component that in turn
has a component of type LOCK_TYPE, C1302 can fail to require a component
of type LOCK_TYPE to be a coarray.

QUESTIONS:

Assume type LOCK_TYPE from ISO_Fortran_Env is accessible.

1. Is the definition of type One below standard conforming?

type, extends(LOCK_TYPE) :: One
  type(lock_type), allocatable :: LOCK[:]
end type One

2. Is the definition of type Four below standard conforming?

type :: Two
  type(lock_type), allocatable :: LOCK[:]
end type Two

type :: Three
  type(two), allocatable :: L
end type Three

Type, extends(Three) :: Four
  type(lock_type), allocatable :: LOCK[:]
end type Four

3. Is the definition of type Six below standard conforming?

type :: Five
end type Five

type, extends(Five) :: Six
  type(two), allocatable :: L
end type Six

4. Is the declaration of the variable X below standard conforming?

  type :: Seven
    type(lock_type) :: L
  end type Seven

  type :: Eight
    type(seven), allocatable :: C
  end type Eight

  type(eight) :: X

ANSWERS:

1.  The LOCK component of type One is allocatable.  Therefore, it is
an ultimate component of type LOCK_TYPE.  Type LOCK_TYPE is not,
however, specified to have an ultimate component of type LOCK_TYPE.
C433 requires the parent type to have an ultimate component of type
LOCK_TYPE if the extension has an ultimate component of type LOCK_TYPE.
Therefore the definition of type One is not permitted.

Extending type LOCK_TYPE, as in the definition of type One, was intended
to be permitted.  Edits are provided to correct this.

2.  The L component of type Three, having type Two, is allocatable.
Therefore type Three does not have an ultimate component of type
LOCK_TYPE.  C433 requires the parent type to have an ultimate component
of type LOCK_TYPE if the extension has an ultimate component of type
LOCK_TYPE.  Therefore, the definition of type Four, an extension of type
Three, is not permitted.

Extending a type that has an allocatable component, that in turn has a
component of type LOCK_TYPE, as in the definition of type Four, was
intended to be permitted.  Edits are provided to correct this.

3.  Type Six does not have an ultimate component of type LOCK_TYPE
because its L component, of type Two, is allocatable.  C433 requires
the parent type to have an ultimate component of type LOCK_TYPE if a
type extension has an ultimate component of type LOCK_TYPE.  Therefore,
the definition of type Six is permitted.

Extending a type that has nothing to do with type LOCK_TYPE, and adding
a component such that an object of the extension type would have a
component of type LOCK_TYPE at some level of component selection, but
that is not an ultimate component, as in the definition of type Six, was
intended to be prohibited.  Permitting it would allow to compromise the
integrity of the type LOCK_TYPE component of the L component using
polymorphism and intrinsic assignment.  Edits are provided to correct
this.

4.  X%C%L is not a subcomponent of X because X%C, of type Seven, is
allocatable.  C1302 requires a named variable with a noncoarray
subcomponent of type LOCK_TYPE to be a coarray.  The declaration of the
variable X of type Eight is permitted because X does not have a
subcomponent of type LOCK_TYPE.  Therefore, C1302 does not require
X%C%L, an entity of type LOCK_TYPE, to be a coarray.

The intent of C1302 was to require that a <lock-variable> in a LOCK or
UNLOCK statement be a coarray or a coindexed object.  Edits are provided
to ensure this.

EDITS:

After definition 1.3.33.2 "parent component", introduce a definition

"1.3.33.2a potential subobject component
   a nonpointer component, or a potential subobject component of a
   nonpointer component"

In C433 in subclause 4.5.2.1, replace "ultimate" with "potential
subobject" twice.  After "parent type" insert "shall be LOCK_TYPE or".

In C1302 in subclause 13.8.2.16, replace "with a noncoarray
subcomponent" with "of a type that has a noncoarray potential subobject
component".

ALTERNATIVE EDITS:

Replace C433 in subclause 4.5.2.1:

"C433 (R425) If EXTENDS appears and the type being defined has a
  component of type LOCK_TYPE at any level of component selection, the
  parent type shall be LOCK_TYPE, or shall have a component of type
  LOCK_TYPE at some level of component selection."

Replace C1302 in subclause 13.8.2.16:

"C1302 A named variable of type LOCK_TYPE, or that has a component of
  type LOCK_TYPE that is not a coarray, at any level of component
  selection, shall be a coarray."

ALTERNATIVE EDIT FOR C1302:

Remove C1302 in subclause 13.8.2.16.

In C853 in subclause 8.5.6, after "shall be", insert "a coarray or
coindexed object".

SUBMITTED BY: Van Snyder

HISTORY: m204  13-xxx    F08/xxxx  Submitted

----------------------------------------------------------------------
