                                                           J3/14-221r1
To: J3
From: Nick Maclaren
Subject: Interoperable procedures
Date: 2014 August 11


This version just adds a more meaningful title, and fixes a few
similar errors.

ISO/IEC 9899:2011 is referred to as C11 in this paper.


----------------------------------------------------------------------

NUMBER: TBD
TITLE: Interoperable procedures
KEYWORD: Interoperability, procedure
DEFECT TYPE: Erratum
STATUS: J3 consideration in progress


In all cases, Alf is a Fortran procedure like this:

    SUBROUTINE Alf (Arg) BIND(C)
        INTERFACE
            SUBROUTINE Arg () BIND(C)
            END SUBROUTINE Arg
        END INTERFACE
        CALL Arg
    END SUBROUTINE Alf


QUESTION 1:

Does the following C code conform to the Fortran standard's requirements
on interoperability?

    extern void Bert (void) {
        ;
    }

    int main (void) {
        alf(Bert);
    }


QUESTION 2:

Does the following C code conform to the Fortran standard's requirements
on interoperability?

    static void Fred (void) {
        ;
    }

    int main (void) {
        alf(Fred);
    }


QUESTION 3:

Does the following C code conform to the Fortran standard's requirements
on interoperability?

    extern inline void arg (void) {
        ;
    }

    int main (void) {
        alf(Joe);
    }


DISCUSSION:

In question 1, 15.5.1p2 states that a procedure is defined by means
other than Fortran shall have the same binding label as the interface.
Function Bert() has a binding label of 'Bert', but 15.5.2p2 states that
the argument has no binding label.

In question 2, 15.5.1p2 states that a procedure is defined by means
other than Fortran shall have a name that has external linkage as
defined by 6.2.2 of ISO/IEC 9899:2011.  Function Fred() has no such
name, as its definition has internal linkage.  However, linkage in C
affects only the visibility of the external name, and has no application
to either types or values, whether in the form of function parameters or
other pointers.

In question 3, C11 6.7.4 describes the inline specifier.  Note that it
does not prevent it from having external linkage (see paragraph 7), but
there are complicated rules about what is allowed and whether two
references to the same external function have the same effect.

I cannot explain the implications of that specification, because I do
not understand them; indeed, none of the BSI C panel did, and the UK
objected to the inline specifier on those grounds.  One aspect where
there was no consensus in WG14 was under what circumstances (if any)
inline functions were required to use the same interface mechanisms as
ordinary functions.  Also, C interfaces can be used to connect Fortran
and C++ (via C++'s defined C interface), and C++'s form of inline is
subtly different from C's; it is unclear whether that is allowed.

This situation makes no sense in Fortran terms, and I think that it was
an oversight not to exclude inline in 15.5.1.


ANSWERS:

Q1.  The code is intended to be conforming.  An edit is provided to
correct the oversight.

Q2.  The code is intended to be conforming.  An edit is provided to
correct the oversight.

Q3.  The code is not intended to be conforming.  An edit is provided to
correct the oversight.


EDITS to 10-007r1:

15.5.1p2 replace the paragraph by:

"If the procedure is defined by means other than Fortran, it shall be
describable by a C prototype that is interoperable with the interface.
It shall not be an inline function as defined by 6.7.4 of ISO/IEC
9899:2011.

If the procedure is defined by means other than Fortran and is accessed
using its binding label, it shall also
    * have a name that has external linkage as defined by 6.2.2 of
ISO/IEC 9899:2011,
    * have the same binding label as the interface.


SUBMITTED BY: Nick Maclaren.


HISTORY: m205   14-nnn   Submitted
