                                                             J3/14-226r2
To:      J3
From:    Nick Maclaren & Bill Long
Subject: Asynchronous progress
Date: 2014 October 17

This paper requests clarification on the principles for data
consistency and asynchronous progress.  Five issues are raised and two
questions are asked.

The motivations are centered on concerns about performance and/or
portability of coarrays to variant hardware implementations.  As such,
the responses and answers are all essentially that the standard should
refrain from specifying an explicit mechanism.

1. Issues
---------

Implementation details are generally outside the scope of the
standard. Whether an extra "helper thread" might be needed to
correctly implement the semantics of the standard is an implementation
detail.

Generally, experts in MPI, as recently as the PGAS 2014 meeting, claim
that the parallel computing requirements in Fortran (as well as SHMEM,
UPC, Coarray-C++ and UPC++) can easily be provided by a runtime
library based only on MPI-3. As this is now widely available, the
concern about implementation is considerably reduced.  Two significant
coarray implementations (Intel and gfortran) employ runtime code based
on MPI.  Other implementations may take advantage of the OpenCoarray
library.

The correct place to handle details like the existence of helper
threads or other software agents is in runtime libraries.


2. Questions
------------

Question 1:

Access to which classes of data should the standard require to progress
asynchronously?

A vendor might provide asynchronous access to more than is required, so
we are considering only what the standard should require.  The obvious
(but not necessarily correct) answer is one of:

    a) Just atomic variables,

    b) Atomic variables and events,

    c) Atomic variables, events and locks,

    d) All coarray data.


Answer 1:

a) Variable definitions and references by atomic subroutines are
   specifically identified as exempt from the segment ordering rules
   (f08:8.5.2p3). Asynchronous access is assumed for these cases.

b) EVENT POST and EVENT WAIT are image control statements (TS: 6.3 and
   6.4). The EVENT_QUERY intrinsic subroutine is an atomic
   subroutine. To properly synchronize updates by EVENT POST and EVENT
   WAIT with each other and with inquiries from EVENT_QUERY, updates
   of the count of an event variable are atomic
   (TS:6.2p2). Asynchronous access to the count of an event variable
   is assumed.

c) LOCK and UNLOCK statements are image control statements
   (f08:8.5.1p2).  The first note (f08:8.5.6 Note 8.42) says that the
   changes to a lock variable are atomic. (This should probably be
   normative, similar to the EVENT case.)  For the lock system to work
   the accesses to the lock variable need to be atomic. Asynchronous
   access to a lock variable is assumed.

d) There are many cases where simple code sequences imply that coarray
   data movement occurs before the end of a segment. For example, the
   statement

      print *, x[4]

   executed in image 2 will not complete until x from image 4 has
   arrived at image 2.  Similarly,

      x_local = x[4]
      call big_sub (x_local, x_new) ! x_new is computed based in
                                    ! the intent(in) first argument
      print *, x_new

   executed on image 2 cannot progress to the call until the value of
   x from image 4 has arrived.

   Because of data usage dependencies within a segment there are often
   cases where asynchronous access is assumed for code to progress.


Question 2:

What extra restrictions on data use do we need for such classes of data?

The obvious example to follow is ASYNCHRONOUS, but it is unclear whether
that is appropriate.


Answer 2:

No extra restrictions on data use are needed.

