                                                           J3/15-138
To: J3
From: John Reid & Bill Long
Subject: Clause 5.9 edits to N2040
Date: 2015 February 19

Discussion
----------

In the recent ballot (see N2045), Reinhold Bader pointed out the need
to avoid a race condition for definitions/references to
allocated coarrays on the stalled image (cf. [31:31-34], [36:11-15]).
An edit addresses this.

In the same ballot, Robert Corbett pointed out that if an image stalls
while executing a CRITICAL construct, other images should be permitted
to execute the construct. An edit addresses this.

In the same ballot, Malcolm Cohen wrote

'(a2) 5.9 states
  "Otherwise, the executing image resumes execution at the END TEAM
statement of the construct"

"the construct" lacks definition.  There can be many CHANGE TEAM
constructs, and more than one of them can be active.'

An edit addresses this.

Further, Malcolm Cohen wrote
"(b) The TS has merely scratched the surface of the semantics that are
being specified for stalled image handling; much more work needs to be
done to clarify what is supposed to happen (e.g. which variables become
undefined, etc.).  Even for failed images some additional work appears
to be needed..."

Edits address this issue for stalled images.

Edits to N2040:
---------------

[14:29] Replace "construct" by "innermost executing CHANGE TEAM
construct".

[14:29-30] Replace "execution ... constuct" by
"(1) execution of all finalizations and deallocations of existing
     objects that would have occurred during normal execution of the
     CHANGE TEAM construct by the stalled image,
 (2) closing any open file that was opened by the execution of the
     CHANGE TEAM construct by the stalled image after any pending
     asynchronous data transfer operations for the file complete, and
 (3) unlocking any locked lock variable that was locked by the
     execution of the CHANGE TEAM construct by the stalled image.
Deallocation of a coarray is delayed until the corresponding
coarrays on the active images of the current team are deallocated.
If an image stalls during the execution of a CRITICAL construct, the
execution of the construct is regarded by other images as complete.
If an image stalls during the execution of a DO CONCURRENT construct,
it is indeterminate which iterations of the construct complete.
A saved variable of an active procedure that was invoked
by the stalled image within the CHANGE TEAM construct becomes undefined.
A variable becomes undefined if it might have been defined or become
undefined by execution of the CHANGE TEAM construct by the stalled
image."

