To: J3                                                J3/15-217
From: Debbie Spittle
Date: 2015 August 26
Subject:  Oracle Voting Status


From: admin@standards.incits.org [mailto:admin@standards.incits.org]
Sent: Tuesday, August 11, 2015 6:02 AM
To: admin@standards.incits.org
Subject: Oracle Voting status in jeopardy for INCITS/PL22.3
- Programming Language Fortran

Dear Oracle,

Oracle is hereby informed that the attendance records in ICMS for
INCITS/PL22.3 - Programming Language Fortran show that none of
designated representatives (those listed on the ICMS roster) have
been present at two of the last three meetings of the group.

Your participation in the work of the committee is appreciated and we
look forward to your continued participation in the future. However,
please note that unless at least one of the designated representatives
is present at the next meeting, the organization will lose voting
status membership in the committee.

For details about attending the next meeting, you can:

* Contact the committee Chair,
* Visit the group page at https://standards.incits.org/apps/org/
workgroup/pl22.3 for information or to view the committee calendar
for details on the next meeting, or
* Search the INCITS public calendar at http://www.incits.org/
participation/calendar for details on the next meeting.

For reference, the rules under which the committee operates are
documented in the INCITS Organization, Policies and Procedures
document stating the following:

3.8.4 Termination of Membership

3.8.4.2 Technical Committees, TGs, and SGs

Voting Members of the TCs, TGs and SGs shall be warned in writing
upon failure of the organization to:

1. attend two out of three successive meetings. If they are not
represented at the next meeting, the organization is converted
to Advisory status; or

2. return two out of three successive non accelerated LBs. If the
next non accelerated LB (identified by LB number) after the warning
is not returned, the organization is converted to Advisory status.

Voting and advisory memberships shall be canceled by the INCITS
Secretariat for failure to pay appropriate service fees within the time
specified by the INCITS Secretariat.

An organization that has had its voting membership converted to
Advisory status or terminated may re-establish membership in accordance
with Sections 3.7, Application for Membership, and 3.8, Categories of
Membership. If this membership is re-established within the same billing
period and the organization has paid its fee, no new service fee shall
be assessed.


An organization that has had its voting membership terminated may
re-establish membership in accordance with the INCITS Organization,
Policies and Procedures. If this membership is re-established within
the same billing period and the organization has paid its fee, no new
service fee shall be accessed.

Section 3.8.1.3 TCs, TGs, and SGs

An organization may be a member of a particular TC or a TG without regard
to membership in any other IOE.

Voting membership in TCs, TGs, and SGs is open to all directly and
materially affected parties that meet attendance and voting requirements
and pay the designated service fee(s).

A representative of a prospective voting member shall initially attend
a meeting of the TC, TG, or SG without voting privileges and reaffirm
interest in the work of the TC, TG, or SG. Voting privileges become
effective with attendance at one of the next two successive meetings
and receipt by the Secretariat of the applicable fees for the membership
year. For a new TC, TG, or SG, all attendees at the formation meeting or
second meeting shall be considered voting members, subject to the rules
in Section 3.8.2, Limits on Voting Membership.

An organization with voting membership shall appoint one and only one
principal representative and may appoint one or more alternate
representatives.

In order to comply with ANSI requirements, while all parties may
participate in a discussion of U.S. positions, only those organizations
which are a U.S. National Interested Party may vote to establish a U.S.
position on TAG matters.


The complete copy of the INCITS Organization, Policies and Procedures
can be found at http://www.incits.org/policies.

This jeopardy notice was sent by an automated system. If you believe
this notice was sent in error or you have any questions, please contact
the chairman of the committee or the INCITS Secretariat
at lbarra@itic.org.

Sincerely,
INCITS

