To: J3                                                 J3/16-013
From: Dan Nagle
Subject: Guidelines for Submitting J3 Papers
Date: 2016 June 09

Reference: J3/96-140r1, J3/08-013, J3/13-315

In 1996 The ANSI Fortran Technical Committee J3 moved to go "total
electronic" in terms of pre-meeting distribution, post-meeting
distribution, minutes, and announcements (see the referenced paper).
The purpose was to minimize or eliminate costs associated with hard copy
reproduction and mailing.  All documents at that time were made available
via anonymous ftp from a server maintained by Kurt Hirchert
at the University of Illinois.

Since that time, changes in information technology and publishing
software motivates this revision to the guidelines for submitting J3
papers.  The following guidelines for submitting papers for consideration
by J3 were discussed and approved by J3 at Meeting 202, October 14-18,
2013 in Las Vegas, Nevada.  The intent is that these guidelines be
distributed electronically to all principal members, alternates,
observers, liaisons, and correspondents, and implemented immediately.
Note that the guidelines are similar to those of WG5 so as to maximize
compatibility and familiarity with electronic document handling and
distribution for both organizations.

1.  Who may submit.

    Any member of J3, or any non-member who is interested in contributing
    to the development and standardization of the Fortran scientific
    computing language may submit a paper to J3 for consideration.
    Members should use the upload page in the members' area of the J3 web
    site, non-members should email their paper to the Librarian
    via danlnagle@mac.com.

2.  When to submit.

    J3 requires that papers that are to be considered at a duly scheduled
    meeting of the Committee be submitted to the Librarian at least two
    weeks prior to the meeting.  Papers submitted after this time may be
    considered by the Committee as time and work load permit, as long as
    there is no objection to considering such a "late paper".

3.  Procedure for submitting a paper to J3.

    a. The document will be prepared in an electronic format using only
       an ASCII character text file (that is, with extension .txt) with
       line feeds.  Please limit the line length to less than 75
       characters.  J3 may choose to accept a paper in another format.
       Papers submitted in the prescribed format may also, if desired,
       be submitted in other formats for inclusion on the server (for
       example, .tex, .doc, .ps, .pdf, .rtf, .ppt, .html, and so on).

    b. To submit a document to J3, please use the upload page in
       the members' area of the J3 server.  The detailed upload process
       is described below.

    c. J3 document files (other that text files) should be formatted so
       that they can be printed out conveniently on either A4 (European)
       or 8.5" x 11" (US) paper. The easiest way to do this is to set the
       margins as follows:
                           US                          A4

           Top       0.75 inch (1.91 cm)      1.00 inch (2.54 cm)
           Bottom    0.75 inch (1.91 cm)      1.19 inch (3.30 cm)
           Left      1.00 inch (2.54 cm)      1.00 inch (2.54 cm)
           Right     1.00 inch (2.54 cm)      0.75 inch (1.91 cm)

       If these margins are used for the appropriate size of paper,
       then the printed area will be 9.5" x 6.5", or 24.1 cm x 16.5 cm,
       regardless of the original paper size.   Do not use fonts other
       than the standard ones available on modern printers.  The
       preferred font is Courier New (10 characters per inch).

Authors of papers are advised that papers are listed by title, and
are assigned to subgroups for consideration by topic.  Therefore,
limiting any one paper to one topic described in the title assists the
processing of papers and is encouraged.  Likewise, authors wanting
to comment on clarity or editorial style are encouraged to limit
any one paper to one clause of the draft standard.  Papers suggesting
new features should likewise specify only one new feature per paper.
Authors may submit several papers to cover the topics desired.

Authors of papers that propose changes to the text of the standard
are advised that a complete change should show each explicit change and
the language in the standard before and after the change.  A proposed
change should apply to the latest revision of the draft standard
and should describe the location within the standard by page number,
paragraph number, line number, and subclause number and title.  A short
description, within braces and immediately following each proposed
change, of the intents and purposes of the proposed change should
be included.

There is a new upload process in place which has a single upload page
for meeting documents and standing documents.  The page supports
ordinary text files and files formatted such as pdf, html, xls, and so on.

For all files the index of papers for a meeting is updated
with an entry for the paper.  For text files, the necessary information
is taken from the uploaded paper itself.  For papers in another format,
the information is taken from an existing entry in the meeting index
of papers with the same paper number.  This entry is made by uploading
a template paper.  The librarian constructs the annual list of papers
(yy-000.txt) from the meeting index of papers.

The type of paper is determined from the name of the upload paper,
as follows:  If the file name suffix is not txt, the paper is assumed
to be formatted.  To upload a formatted paper, first upload
a template paper (downloadable from a link on the upload page), edit it
appropriately, and upload it.  This creates the entry in the meeting
index of papers. In the template paper, lines with a "#" in column one
are elided.

For a meeting paper, keep the template paper name template.txt.
For a standing document, change the name to be the correct
name for the standing document (for example, 13-001r2.txt).

If the file name is of the form yy-nnn, where yy is the year of the
meeting and nnn is an existing paper number (nnn >= 100), the paper is
treated as a revision of the existing paper, and is assigned the next
highest revision number.  The number must exist in the meeting index
of papers.

If the file name is yy-0nn, the file is assumed to be a standing
document.  Standing documents must have the correct revision number
in the name (because the previous revision may be in the index of papers
for another meeting).

To upload a formatted meeting paper, first upload the template, keeping
the name template.txt, to get your paper number. Then upload your
formatted paper with the correct name, for example, yy-nnn.pdf.  The
entry in the index of papers is taken from the entry generated
by uploading the template.

To upload a formatted standing document, first upload the template,
renaming it to the correct standing document number.  Then you may
upload the formatted version and the entry in the index of papers is
taken from the entry made when the template was uploaded.  The formatted
file must have a name that will match the entry in the index of papers.

In the uploaded text paper, if a line starts with "Reference:", what
follows will be copied into the index of papers entry below the subject.

The author's name(s) is taken from the Author: line in the paper's
header.  The author's name in the index of papers is the final non-blank
string following the last embedded blank.  Thus, "Batson D. Belfry"
will be listed as author of "Belfry", while "Marinus van der Lubbe"
will be listed as author of "Lubbe".

Multiple authors should be separated by "&" signs.  Otherwise,
the author string is treated as one author.  Thus, authors
"Bugs Bunny & Elmer Fudd" will be listed as "Bunny & Fudd", while
authors "Bugs Bunny and Elmer Fudd" will be listed as "Fudd".

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
               J3 Librarian:  Dan Nagle
                      email:  danlnagle@mac.com
