                                                             J3/16-114
To:         J3 Members
From:       Bill Long
Subject:    UTI 013, 014
Date: 2016 January 21
References: 16-007

Discussion:
----------

UTI 13:

Module m1
  Real x
End Module
Module m2
  Use m1
  Private m1
  Asynchronous x
End Module

According to 5.6.1, the "default accessibility" of X in M2 is
PRIVATE. But according to the second sentence of the paragraph above,
the accessibility of X in M2 is the default accessibility in M2, which
is PUBLIC.

Which is it?

Answer: PUBLIC.


UTI 14:

Module m1
  Real,Public :: x
  Private
End Module
Module m2
  Use m1
  Private
  Public x
End Module
Module m3
Use m2
  ! Hello X
End Module

X is accessed via module m2 (with default PRIVATE accessibility) and
m1 (with default PRIVATE accessibility). Therefore by the third
sentence in the paragraph above, the accessibility of X in m3 is
PRIVATE. This is clearly wrong.


Answer: It should be PUBLIC.


General issue giving rise to UTI 013 and UTI 014:

The syntax form private :: module_name is a new form of specifying a
default accessibility.  Accessibility can be specified in one of three
ways.

Explicitly:

 - Name is listed in a PUBLIC or PRIVATE statement, or

 - PUBLIC or PRIVATE attribute is specified in the definition or
   declaration of an object with that name.

Default:

  - PUBLIC or PRIVATE statement in the specification part of the
    module, with no modules or names listed.

Module default (new):

  - PUBLIC or PRIVATE statement that lists a module name.

Cases for a particular identifier:

1) Object is NOT accessed by USE association (excludes module default
   specification method):

   a) If accessibility is explicitly specified for a name, then
      accessibility via that name is the explicitly specified
      accessibility. (Explicit specification overrides any default
      that might apply for that name.)  Otherwise,

   b) If accessibility is not explicitly specified, then accessibility
      for that name is the default for the current module. (The new
      form of specification applies only to names accessed by USE
      association from another module.)

2) Object is accessed by USE association, and not declared locally:

   a) Same as 1(a).  Otherwise,

   b) If module default accessibility is specified for the name of the
      object for each module that provides access to the object, and
      all of those defaults are PRIVATE, then the accessibility of the
      name is PRIVATE.

   c) If module default accessibility is specified as PUBLIC for the
      name of an object for at least one module that provides access to
      the object, then the accessibility of the object by that name is
      PUBLIC.

   d) If module default accessibility is not specified for any module
      that provides access, then the accessibility is the default
      accessibility for the current module. (This was the old rule -
      before module defaults existed.)

3) Object is accessed by USE association and declared locally:

   a) If the object is declared locally, but without explicitly
      specified accessibility, its accessibility is the default
      accessibility of the module.


Relation to existing text:

5.5.2p3 (sentences separated):

An identifier that is specified in a module or is accessible in a
module by use association has either the PUBLIC attribute or PRIVATE
attribute. [Just says no identifier gets left out.]

[Possibly add: An identifier whose accessibility is explicitly
specified has that accessibility.] [1(a) and 2(a)]

An identifier whose accessibility is not explicitly
specified and that is declared in the module has the default
accessibility for that module (5.6.1). [3(a)]

An identifier that is not declared in the module but which is
accessible by use association is PRIVATE if and only if the default
accessibility for each module via which it is accessed is
PRIVATE,[2(b)] and PUBLIC otherwise.[Mix of 2(c), 2(d), but different
result for 2(d)]

Repair:

..., is PUBLIC if the default accessibility for any module via which
it is accessed in PUBLIC [2(c)], and the default accessibility of the
module otherwise [2(d)].


5.6.1p1:

An access-stmt with an access-id-list specifies the accessibility
attribute, PUBLIC or PRIVATE, of each access-id in the list that is
not a module name. [1(a) and 2(a); explicit specification method].

Appearance of a module name in an access-stmt specifies the default
accessibility of the identifiers of entities accessed from that
module. [Module default method]

An access-stmt without an access-id list specifies the default
accessibility of the identifiers of entities declared in the module,
and of entities accessed from a module whose name does not appear in
any access-stmt in the module. [Default method]

If an identifier is accessed from another module and also declared
locally, it has the default accessibility of a locally declared
identifier. [3(a) confirmation]


Edits to 16-007:
-----

[95:12] In 5.5.2 Accessibility attribute, after the first sentence of
para 3, insert a new sentence:

"An identifier whose accessibility is explicitly specified has that
accessibility."


[92:15] In 5.5.2 Accessibility attribute, at the end of para 3, change

"and PUBLIC otherwise."

to

"is PUBLIC if the default accessibility for any module via which
it is accessed in PUBLIC, and the default accessibility of the
module otherwise."

