To:         J3 Members                                       J3/16-278
From:       Van Snyder
Subject:    Comment on scope of argument keywords
References: 16-007r2
Date: 2016 October 04

1. Introduction
---------------

19.3.5p1 specifies that the scope of argument keywords is the scoping
unit that is the host of the explicit interface definition.  19.3.5p2
specifies that the scope of argument keywords of an intrinsic procedure
is the scoping unit in which the reference appears.

Structure components have a scope of their type definition instead of
the scoping unit containing their type definition, and there is an
explanation in 19.3.4 how they can be used by qualifying them with an
accessible data object.

19.3.5p2 restricts the use of argument keywords to procedure
references.  This is different from the explanation how structure
components can be used by qualifying them with an accessible data
object.

Since argument keywords can only be used in a reference to a procedure,
there seems to be no reason why they need broader scope.

It would be simpler if they had a scope of the reference.  The scope
wouldn't be different for intrinsic procedures, procedures defined by
subprograms, interfaces defined by interface bodies, and interfaces
inferred from procedure declaration statements that specify explicit
interface.  It wouldn't be necessary to explain how they are indirectly
accessible by use or host association of the procedure.  It wouldn't be
necessary explicitly to restrict their use to procedure references
because no entity can be used outside a scope where it is accessible.

2. Edits
--------

[513:34-514:5 19.3.5p1-2] Replace the text of the subclause:

"As an argument keyword, a dummy argument name has a scope of the
procedure reference in which it appears."

Maybe insert a NOTE:

"NOTE 19.3
  Argument keywords are determined by dummy argument names of intrinsic
  procedures, or in an explicit interface that is accessible where the
  procedure is referenced."

or a more loquatious NOTE:

"NOTE 19.3
  Argument keywords are determined by dummy argument names of intrinsic
  procedures, or in an explicit interface that is accessible where the
  procedure is referenced.  An explicit interface that is specified by
  an interface body might use dummy argument names that are different
  from the definition of the procedure, or different from an explicit
  interface in a different scoping unit."
