                                                           J3/16-230
To: J3
From: Anton Shterenlikht
Subject: Automation of J3 work
Date: 2016 June 08

Justification:

J3 work is made unnecesarily tedious by wilful
rejection of capabilities in automatic computer tools,
specically created for collaborative document work.

Proposal:

- The version control (svn?) should have (might already be
  set up this way?) branches, head and tags.

- All members of the commitee (J3 and WG5)
  have commit access to branches, and read access to
  head and tags.

- Only the editor has commit access to head and tags.
  (The editor is a single point of failure, so I don't
  like it, but given that it's a big change already,
  this will do for now).

- Some time prior to the coming meeting the editor
  makes a new branch from head.

- All commitee members commit their changes to this
  branch.

- The editor can review each commit as it comes in,
  and accept/reject at this stage.
  Other members of the commitee can review and
  comment on the mailing list as well.
  There is a ample space for justification
  discussion in the  commit message.

- At the meeting (or immediately before the meeting),
  the editor merges the branch to head and creates a
  single diff for review at the meeting.

- A the meeting the committee members review this
  diff and commit changes directly to head.
  Unacceptable bits of the diff can simply be discarded.

- After each commit the draft PDF is automatically
  reuilt and is available to all for review.

- At the end of the meeting, the editor
  produces a final draft edit for this meeting,
  and spawns a new branch from this edit.

Benefits:

- regex ops will be much easier (faster) if
  src were available to all. Examples:
  where does "cooperative synchronization"
  first appears in the standard or TS.
  Much harder to search for this in PDF.

- Low likelyhood of conflict beween different
  commits.

- Much less manual work.

- Complete text will be much easlier to see.

- No copy/paste - ever.
