                                                           J3/17-160
To: J3
From: John Reid & Bill Long
Subject: STAT argument or specifier
Date: 2017 June 03

Discussion:
-----------

In 16.6 Collective subroutines, para 4 says
"If the STAT argument is present in a reference to a collective
subroutine on one image, it shall be present on all the corresponding
references."

This is an unnecesary restriction because para 1 of this section says
that the same statement is executed by all the active images of the
current team. Hence the STAT argument textually appears uniformly on
all participating images. If the STAT argument appears, it cannot be
an optional argument that is not present because it is defined by
execution of the statement.

However the "same statement" rule does not apply to a SYNC ALL,
SYNC IMAGES, or SYNC TEAM statement. A restriction is needed if the
STAT= specifier is present. It is the intention that if an image of
the team has failed, execution will continue, albeit with incorrect
results. This cannot happen if the STAT= specifier is not present on an
image because the failed image will provoke error termination on that
image and this will result in error termination on all images.

Note that a stat variable in a STAT= specifier cannot be an optional
argument that is not present because it is defined by the execution of
the statement.

Edits to 17-007r1:
------------------

[217:17] In 11.6.11 STAT= and ERRMSG= specifiers in image control
statements, after para 4, add new para and note:

If the STAT= specifier appears in a <sync-stat> in a SYNC ALL,
SYNC IMAGES, or SYNC TEAM statement and the statement is executed on
an image, each of the corresponding statements on the other images
involved shall have the STAT= specifier in its <sync-stat>.

NOTE 11.48a
This restriction is not needed for a CHANGE TEAM, END TEAM, or
FORM TEAM statement because the execution of the statement on an image
implies that the same statement is executed on all active images of the
current team.

[345:24-25] In 16.6 Collective subroutines, delete para 4.
