                                                           J3/17-214
To: J3
From: John Reid & Reinhold Bader
Subject: Comments 68, 69, and 71
Date: 2017 October 07

Discussion:
-----------

Comments 68, 69, and 71 consider assumed-size arrays in three
subclauses of 18:

1. For CFI_select_part, comment 68 says that the source parameter
   should not be allowed to be a C descriptor for an assumed-size array.
   We have not found a direct prohibition against constructing an array
   section by component selection on an assumed-size array, but
   [137:7-8] says
   "In an <array-section> with no <section-subscript-list>, the rank
   and shape of the array is the rank and shape of the <part-ref> with
   nonzero rank".
   This implies that the <part-ref> must have a shape, which means that
   it cannot be an assumed-size array. If it were allowed, what could
   you do with it? It can't be used in an assignment because it has no
   shape. It can't be used as an actual argument corresponding to an
   assumed-size dummy argument because it is not contiguous so copy-in
   copy-out would be needed but the shape is unknown.

2. For CFI_setpointer, comment 69 says that the source parameter should
   not be allowed to be a C descriptor for an assumed-size array,
   because Fortran pointer assignment requires that the target have a
   shape. This function is intended to give the C programmer the
   equivalent of pointer assignment in Fortran. It is actually
   giving the C programmer slightly more. We support the change but
   it might be argued that none is needed.

3. An assumed-shape dummy argument cannot be associated with an
   assumed-size actual argument. [318:28-29] states this for Fortran,
   but it may be appropriate to reiterate this for C. If it is decided
   that no normative text is needed, the edit could be reworded as a
   NOTE, adding a reference to subclause 15.5.2.4.


Edits to 17-007r2:
---------------

[505:41-42] In 18.5.5.8 The CFI_select_part function, para 2, source,
change
"for a nonallocatable nonpointer array, an allocated allocatable array,
or an associated array pointer"
to
"for an allocated allocatable array, an associated array pointer, or a
nonallocatable nonpointer array that is not an assumed-shape array".

[506:35] In 18.5.5.9 The CFI_setpointer function, para 2, source,
change
"for a nonallocatable nonpointer data object, an allocated allocatable
object, or a data pointer object"
to
"for an allocated allocatable object, a data pointer object, or a
nonallocatable nonpointer data object that is not assumed-size".

[507:24+] In 18.6 Restrictions on C descriptors, end of para 2, add a
new paragraph:
"If the address of a C descriptor is a C actual argument that
corresponds to an assumed-shape Fortran dummy argument, that
descriptor shall not be for an assumed-size array."

