To: J3                                                     J3/17-200r1
From: Salvatore Filippone & Damian Rouson & Bill Long
Subject: Constraint C824
Date: 2018-February-13


0. History
----------

This paper is an update of, and replacement for, J3/17-200.


1. Discussion
-------------

In the Parallel Sparse Basic Linear Algebra Subroutines (PSBLAS) library,
communication buffers would ideally be coarray components inside derived
types that have other components for storing the data prior to packing the
data into the buffer. Storing the buffer in the same derived type as the
data that will be packed into the buffer clarifies the data dependencies,
making it less likely that a programmer will rely on critical sections to
manage buffer accesses.  A Fortran 2018 implementation of PSBLAS would
have data structures of the following form:

  type vector
    real, allocatable :: component(:),component_buffer(:)[:]
  end type

  type(vector) :: bundle, field

This fixes the number of such data objects in the program (two in the above
case: bundle and field).  Fixing the number of data objects at compile time
is undesirable in the context of a library  designed to be installed and
used  in multiple applications, and because it prevents those same objects
from being reused as components of other higher-level objects in a
sufficiently flexible way.

However, C824 in N2146, 8.5.6 CODIMENSION attribute (page 99) states,

    "An entity whose type has a coarray ultimate component shall be a
     nonpointer nonallocatable scalar, shall not be a coarray, and
     shall not be a function result."


which precludes the more flexible data structures required in PSBLAS:

  type(vector), allocatable :: bundle(:)
  allocate(bundle(100))


2. Additional Discussion
------------------------

Coarray components are already required to be allocatable:

C747 (R737) If a <coarray-spec> appears, it shall be a
            <deferred-coshape-spec-list> and the component shall have
            the ALLOCATABLE attribute.

The example TYPE in part 1 conforms to this requirement.

Additional limitations are needed to make the desired change work. In
particular, automatic deallocations of the coarray component are not
desirable. Those could occur if the object goes out of scope (local
variable at the end of a procedure, for example), or in an assignment
where the variable is the parent object.  Hence, some restrictions
should be considered::

a) The parent object (bundle(:) in the example above) should have the
   SAVE attribute. {Prevent out-of-scope issue.}

b) An allocatable whole array of a type that has a coarray component
   shall not appear as the variable in an assignment
   statement. {Prevent automatic reallocation.}

c) An actual argument of a type that has a coarray component shall not
   be associated with a dummy argument with the INTENT(OUT)
   attribute. {Prevent automatic deallocation.}

d) A discontiguous actual array argument of a type with a coarray
   component shall not be associated with a contiguous dummy
   argument. {Prevent copy-in/copy-out.}

In an array like bundle(:) each element has a separate
coarray. Collective actions, such as allocation, on the corresponding
coarrays of the involved images have to include the set of coarrays
for the same element of bundle on each image of the current
team. Similarly, the shape of bundle(:) should be the same on each
image so that each element's coarray has a corresponding coarray on
the other images of the current team.  If the parent array is
polymorphic, it should have the same dynamic type on all the images.


3. Edits

In C824 of 8.5.6 CODIMENSION attribute, change "shall be a nonpointer,
nonallocatable scalar" to "shall not be a pointer".

{The effect of this change is that the parent can be an array as well
as a scalar, and it can be allocatable.}

Additional edits would be required to implement the limitations
discussed in part 2 above.
