                                                            J3/17-231
To: J3
From: Malcolm Cohen
Subject: USE statement mis-statements
Date: 2017 October 15


1. Introduction

14.2.2 "The USE statement and use association" correctly describes, in
paragraph 2, the association model: that there are local entities (with
their own identifiers, usually the same identifiers as the module
entities) that are associated with the module entities.

However, paragraph 7 describes a different model, where the module
entities have local identifiers.  This is confusing.

Also, the description in this subclause states that the associated
entities/identifiers are "local" entities/identifiers, which contradicts
the wording for the use of USE in a BLOCK construct, where they are
construct entities.  This is especially gratuitous in paragraph two,
where the entities are first called "accessed entities" and subsequently
referred to using the different term "local entities".

Finally, uniqueness of use association excludes "generic interfaces and
defined operators", but a defined operator is merely an identifier for a
generic interface.  This is both redundant and incorrect - the entity
being accessed is the generic interface, and when p8 says that "Generic
interfaces and defined operators are handled as described in 15.4.3.4",
it is notable that 15.4.3.4 makes no mention of operators whatsoever.

Edits are provided to address these flaws.


2. Edits to 17-007r2

[296:27,30,31] 14.2.2 The USE statement and use association, p2.
    "except that a local entity" -> "except that an accessed entity",
    "default, the local entities" -> "default, the accessed entities",
    "different local" -> "different".
{Remove unnecessarily different, and incorrect, terminology/}
This makes that whole enormous paragraph read:
   "The USE statement provides the means by which a scoping unit accesses
    named data objects, derived types, procedures, abstract interfaces,
    generic identifiers, and namelist groups in a module. The entities in
    the scoping unit are use associated with the entities in the module.
    The accessed entities have the attributes specified in the module,
    except that an accessed entity may have a different accessibility
    attribute, it may have the ASYNCHRONOUS attribute even if the
    associated module entity does not, and if it is not a coarray it may
    have the VOLATILE attribute even if the associated module entity does
    not. The entities made accessible are identified by the names or
    generic identifiers used to identify them in the module. By default,
    the accessed entities are identified by the same identifiers in the
    scoping unit containing the USE statement, but it is possible to
    specify that different identifiers are used. A use-associated entity
    is considered to have been previously defined."

[298:3] Same subclause, p7,
    After "An accessible entity in the referenced module"
    change "has one or more local identifiers."
    to     "is associated with one or more accessed entities, each with
            its own identifier.".
{State the model we use correctly.}
Note: this sentence is followed by "These identifiers are" and a list of
      how the identifiers are determined.

[298:11] Same subclause, p8,
    After "Two or more accessible ultimate entities, other than generic
           interfaces"
    delete "or defined operators", and
    change ", may have the same local identifier only if the identifier is
            not used"
    to     ", shall not be associated with the same accessed entity unless
            its identifier is not used".
{Restate in terms of the model we actually use. Use "shall not ... unless"
 formulation which is clearer and more direct than "may ... only if".}

[298:12] Same paragraph,
         Before "and handled"
         delete "and defined operators".
{Incorrect redundancy.}

[298:13-14] Same paragraph
    After   "Except for these cases,"
    change  "the local identifier of any entity given accessibility by a
             USE statement shall differ from the local identifiers of all
             other entities accessible to the scoping unit"
    to      "an accessed entity in a scoping unit shall not be use
             associated with more than one accessible entity".
{Restate in terms of the model we actually use.}

These edits make the whole of paragraph 8 read:
   "An ultimate entity is a module entity that is not accessed by use
    association. Two or more accessible ultimate entities, other than
    generic interfaces, shall not be associated with the same accessed
    entity unless its identifier is not used. Generic interfaces are
    handled as described in 15.4.3.4. Except for these cases, an accessed
    entity in a scoping unit shall not be use associated with more than
    one accessible entity."

ALTERNATIVE:
[298:10-14] Replace entirety of paragraph 8 with:
   "An ultimate entity is a module entity that is not accessed by use
    association. An accesed entity shall not be associated with two or
    more ultimate entities unless its identifier is not used, or the
    ultimate entities are generic interfaces. Generic interfaces are
    handled as described in 15.4.3.4."
{Restate as a simple requirement.
 The first sentence is actually unchanged.}

===END===
