                                                           J3/17-215
To: J3
From: John Reid & Bill Long
Subject: Comment 41
Date: 2017 October 07

Discussion:
-----------

Comment 41 suggests inserting the extra paragraph shown below because
"it should be stated more clearly that segment ordering ensures memory
operation order, in the same way as line 5-13, page 212".

It might be thought that this is not needed because the topic is
already covered by the text in paragraph 3 of 11.6.2 Segments
[209:3-15].

The proposer, Yasuharu Hayashi from NEC says
"We agree that paragraph 3 of 11.6.2 can imply that segment ordering
ensures memory operation order.
However, we still think it is better to insert the paragraph we are
suggesting because paragraph 3 of 11.6.2 states the cases in which
data dependencies are prohibited but not the conditions in which
memory operation orders are ensured.
In very early versions of the coarray specification, data dependencies
among unordered segments were allowed, but the results were undefined
(i.e. memory operation orders were not ensured). Therefore, we think
that permission of data dependencies does not necessarily mean the
guarantee of memory operation orders."

There are two alternatives:
1. Make no change.
2. Make the edit suggested in comment 41.

Edit to 17-007r2:
---------------

[209:2] In 11.6.2 Segments, after para 2, insert para:

"If the segment P_i on image P precedes the segment Q_j on image Q,
   * a variable X on any image is defined, referenced, becomes
     undefined, or has its allocation status, pointer association
     status, array bounds, dynamic type, or type parameters changed or
     inquired about by execution of a statement of the segment P_i on
     image P, and
   * X is defined, referenced, becomes undefined, or has its allocation
     status, pointer association status, array bounds, dynamic type, or
     type parameters changed or inquired about by execution of a
     statement of the segment Q_j on image Q,
 then the action regarding X in the segment P_i on image P precedes the
 action regarding X in the segment Q_j on image Q."

