To: J3                                                     J3/18-125
From: Dan Nagle
Subject: Asynchronous subroutine execution
Date: 2018-February-14


Discussion
----------

Modern processors are multicore.  Each generation changes
the core count.  On a shared node, the number of cores
may be highly variable over time.  Different images may execute
on nodes with different numbers of cores.  Some cores
may be highly specialized (integer-only encryption cores,
for example).  Some nodes may have off-die cores, but others not.
Asynchronous input/output now is limited to a single transfer statement.
There may be advantages to several transfers per wait.

Modern software engineering prefers to contain one logical function
within one procedure, rather than interleaving unrelated instructions.

The result of the above is that opportunities for asynchronous
execution abound, but as of today, Fortran does not have a ready
way for applications programs to avail themselves of all assets
present.


Proposal
--------

If a subroutine could be executed on an image asynchronously,
applications programmers would have a tool to access the resources
now present, and a way to readily take advantage of future hardware.

How to achieve this with minimal effort?

I propose a simple asynchronous execution for subroutines.
Functions are not included due to the value provided by a function
reference must be consumed immediately, so the advantages are not
there.

The basic idea is to mark the CALL statement, but not the subroutine
statement, with a means of notifying the program when execution
from a marked reference completes.  Currently, Fortran has two
candidate mechanisms for the notification:  events and asynchronous
i/o identifiers.

Now:

CALL FOO( whatever)

could be generalized to

CALL FOO( whatever), EV= <event-name>
or
CALL FOO( whatever), ID= <int-name>

where <event-name> is the name of a variable of type EVENT_TYPE,
and <int-name> is the name of an integer.

This approach allows a simple dispatch-then-await-completion model.

Image data that may be updated by the asynchronous procedure
is marked with the ASYNCHRONOUS attribute in those scopes where
the asynchronous execution is active.  This follows the model
of asynchronous input/output and asynchronous execution of C functions.


Straw Vote
----------

Should the model use events or i/o ID= and WAIT statements?

Advantages of events:  are visible from other images
Advantages of identifiers:  this is more like i/o, so use i/o options

I prefer events, but I can be persuaded.


