To: J3                                                     J3/18-279
From: Tom Clune & Steve Lionel
Subject: Extending usability of deferred-length strings
Date: 2018-October-17

Reference: 18-130

1. Introduction
---------------

Deferred length strings have proven to be a very useful and popular
feature.  However, there remain several aspects in the language that
currently require fixed-length strings or allocated deferred-length
strings of sufficient length. This could/should be improved to work with
deferred-length strings.

At meeting 215, J3 approved this item for moving forward.

2. Use cases
------------

2.1 IOMSG and ERRMSG

Many Fortran statements optionally return status information in the
form of strings (IOMSG and ERRMSG).  Use of these requires that the
user provide a string of "sufficient" length, and there is no standard
mechanism to determine the necessary length.  It would be preferable
to allow these features to assign deferred-length-strings as if by
intrinsic assignment.  Unallocated strings would be allocated and
filled.  Allocated strings of insufficient length would be
reallocated and then filled.

2.2 Intrinsics that return strings

Several intrinsic procedures (e.g., GET_COMMAND,
GET_ENVIRONMENT_VARIABLE, ...) also have intent out string arguments.
Unlike the features above, these at least typically have a mechanism
to determine the necessary length.  A typical use is to then

   CALL GET_ENVIRONMENT_VARIABLE('PATH', LENGTH=n)
   ALLOCATE(CHARACTER(LEN=n) :: var
   CALL GET_ENVIRONMENT_VARIABLE('PATH', VALUE=var)

A natural simplification would be to allow allocatable,
deferred-length strings to be passed to the intrinsic which would then
perform the necessary allocation internally, if the value length is
different from the current length (or if the variable is unallocates).
So users could do:

   CHARACTER(LEN=:), ALLOCATABLE :: var, msg
   CALL GET_ENVIRONMENT_VARIABLE('PATH', VALUE=var, ERRMSG=msg)

If there is no error, then var would be assigned the value of
the environment variable as if by intrinsic assignment. (If msg
was also deferred-length and there is no error, it is unchanged.)

Note: allocated deferred-length strings should be reallocated as-if by
intrinsic assignment.


2.3 Writes to internal files

As with IOMSG and ERRMSG, there is no general mechanism for a user to
determine how long a string is required for writes to internal files.
A typical scenario is to either use a hopefully-large-enough fixed
length string (or an allocated large-enough deferred-length string)
and then trim:

   ALLOCATE (CHARACTER(LEN=MAX_LEN) :: buffer)
   WRITE(buffer, fmt) a, b, c
   buffer = TRIM(buffer)

Alternatively, IOSTAT can be used to iteratively increase the buffer
size to provide a more robust mechanism:

   INTEGER :: n, stat

   n = MIN_LENGTH
   stat = -1
   DO WHILE (stat /= 0)
      ALLOCATE (CHARACTER(LEN=MAX_LEN) :: buffer)
      WRITE(buffer, fmt, IOSTAT=stat) a, b, c
      IF (stat /= 0) DEALLOCATE(buffer)
   END DO
   buffer = TRIM(buffer)

If the buffer could instead be a deferred-length string
then the implementation could be responsible for ensuring a string of
sufficient length is allocated.  The implementation could either start
with a large allocation or even use a strategy to progressively
allocate larger strings until sufficiency is obtained.

If the io-unit is an array, however, there is no reasonable solution
to allow for reallocation.


3. Endorsement

The Data subcommittee endorses this functionality.

4. Proposals

4a. IOMSG and ERRMSG

The current texts for IOMSG and ERRMSG (for statements) say that,
if a value is assigned, it "is assigned an explanatory message,
truncated or padded according to the rules of intrinsic assignment."

The rules of intrinsic assignment already specify that if the length
type parameters differ the variable is deallocated and then reallocated
to the length of what is being assigned. Simply removing "truncated or
padded" from the text is an appropriate edit, along with a note in the
introduction calling out this change.

Indeed, one might argue that the existing text already specifies this
behavior, since no truncating or padding takes place in intrinsic
assignment for such variables. In any case, the "truncated or padded"
text seems redundant.

4b. Intrinsic procedures

Character output arguments for intrinsic subroutines should have wording
added to indicate that assignment of the output value is as if by
intrinsic assignment. A note should be added to the introduction
calling this out. The list of such procedures and relevant arguments is:

DATE_AND_TIME (DATE, TIME, ZONE)
EXECUTE_COMMAND_LINE (CMDMSG)
GET_COMMAND (COMMAND, ERRMSG)
GET_COMMAND_ARGUMENT (VALUE, ERRMSG)
GET_ENVIRONMENT_VARIABLE (VALUE, ERRMSG)
MOVE_ALLOC (ERRMSG)

4c. Internal WRITE

JOR recommends that if the io-unit in a internal WRITE is an
unallocated deferred-length character allocatable scalar variable,
the WRITE behaves as if the record were assigned as if by intrinsic
assignment. The requirement that the variable be unallocated is
to provide consistency with the array case described in the next
paragraph. If the variable is allocated it behaves as it does in
F2008, using the current length.

JOR further recommends that the standard disallow the case of io-unit
being an unallocated deferred-length character array. If the array
is allocated, then it works the way it does in F2008 with the current
length being used.
