To: J3                                                     J3/18-231r1
From: Malcolm Cohen
Subject: Ancient relic unearthed
Date: 2018-June-15


1. Introduction

Back in the mists of time, before Fortran 2003, there was only one kind of
type-spec, and so all the expressions in it were variously constrained to
be constant or specification expressions.

In Fortran 2003 type-spec was split into declaration-type-spec, where all
the type-param-value expressions are required to be specification exprs,
and plain type-spec which has no such constraint.  This was to support
    [ type-spec :: ac-value-list ]
(in an executable statement), and
    ALLOCATE(type-spec :: allocation-list)
where obviously one would wish to have ordinary expressions to specify all
the length type parameters.

And this was achieved for Parameterized Derived Types, and for CHARACTER
in the form
    ALLOCATE(character(userfun(x)) :: string)
where "userfun" is any user function, not needing to be pure etc..

The (new in Fortran 2003) constraint
    C704 (R703) In a declaration-type-spec, every type-param-value that is
                not a colon or an asterisk shall be a specification-expr.
maintains the specification-expr requirements for declarations.

However, one of the old constraints was left behind by accident.  An
archeologist has recently uncovered:

C721 (R723) A type-param-value in a char-length shall be a colon,
            asterisk, or specification-expr.

The form in the ALLOCATE example above is in char-selector (R721) but does
not use char-length, so that one is fine, however the very similar
    ALLOCATE(character*(userfun(x)) :: string)
is parsed via char-length, and so falls foul of the relic C721.

Clearly it is nonsensical that using the "*" syntax in a type-spec in an
executable statement would effect the validity of its length type
parameter expression in this way.

Actually, on careful examination, we see that C721 requires a colon,
asterisk, or <specification-expr>, BUT there is NO such BNF production
in the rule for <type-param-value> (it has colon, asterisk, and
<scalar-int-expr>).

Which means that not only is the above technically prohibited, so are
    CHARACTER*(13) X
and
    CHARACTER X*(13),Y*(17)

This absolutely needs to be fixed!

Apart from type-spec, char-length is also used in R739 component-decl,
where it is used as a "character length override", but this is already
handled by C755 which requires any type-param-value expression to be a
specification expression.

It also appears in R803 entity-decl, where it is also used as a character
length override, however R803 is missing an appropriate constraint.

As the only application of C721 that is intended is to entity-decl, it
is otherwise superfluous to requirements and spuriously rejects programs
that ought to be considered valid.

This erroneous constraint should be corrected and moved to R803
entity-decl where it belongs.

Also, C704 has the same flaw vis-a-vis <specification-expr>;
this needs to be corrected.


2. Edits to N2146

Page xviii, Introduction, bullet "Data usage and computation",
Append
  "The \sinr{char-length} in an executable statement is no longer required
   to be a specification expression."
{Technically the effect of C721 was far worse, but few had noticed.}

Page 59, 7.3.2.1 Type specifier syntax, C704
After "that is not a colon or an asterisk shall be a"
Change "<specification-expr>" to "specification expression".

Page 66, 7.4.4.2 Character type specifier, C721,
Delete C721
  "(R723) A type-param-value in a char-length... specification-expr."

Page 96, 8.2 Type declaration statement, after C804 following R803
entity-decl, insert new constraint
  "C804a A type-param-value in a char-length in an entity-decl shall be a
         colon, asterisk, or specification expression."
{Using the ordinary words "specification expression" just means it has to
 satisfy the rules for one, not that it needs to go via the special BNF
 term.}

===END===
