To: J3                                                     J3/18-255
From: Dan Nagle
Subject: new types from old
Date: 2018-October-01


I Introduction

In modern, complex analysis programs, many physical variables
will be required.  In many instances, these different quantities
will be represented by the same computational forms.  However,
the underlying physical quantities are semantically distinct.
Thus, the type system does not, in the most straight-forward
manner possible, support expression of the simulation.

For example, an atmospheric analysis program may use
rank 3 arrays of 64-bit real to store densities of various gasses,
such as CO2, CH4, and H2O.  These gasses are very different,
and likely should be processed as different types.  But the density
of each is described adequately by a single real quantity
at each point in space.

If a derived type is invented for each gas, each invented derived
type will have a single component, to wit, the real density value.
The result is that every reference to the array must be replaced
by the array name qualified by the component name.  In a substantial-
sized program, this conversion is tedious and error-prone.


II Use-cases

Consider

real, dimension( :, :, :) :: h2o
real, dimension( :, :, :) :: co2
real, dimension( :, :, :) :: ch4

If each gas is to be processed separately, procedures will be written
to compute the analysis for each gas.

So

real function analyze_water( water_array)

real function analyze_cardondioxide( carbondioxide_array)

real function analyze_methane( methane_array)

will be defined.

However, as written, the type system provides no help in assuring
that the water array is passed to the analyze water procedure,
rather than, for example, to the methane procedure.  This is because
all three analysis routines take TKR = real, real64, rank-3 arguments,
and so appear identical to the compiler.

If one tried to define derived types with a single component,
say

type :: water
   real :: density
end type water

type( water), dimension( :, :, :) :: h2o

then all occurrences of h2o( i, j, k) must be replaced
by h2o( i, j, k)% density

The value added by this decoration is unclear.

If, however, a new type may be made without the current derived type
decoration, it will help resolve the issue.

So

type, new :: water => real( real64)

then one may code

type( water), dimension( :, :, :) :: h2o

and subsequent references to h2o need not be disturbed.

If the new type participates in generic resolution, then the type system
can help assure that the water array is passed only to the water routine,
and so on.

So

type, new :: water => real( real64)
type, new :: carbondioxide => real( real64)
type, new :: methane => real( real64)

and then

type( water), dimension( :, :, :) :: h2o
type( carbondioxide), dimension( :, :, :) :: co2
type( methane), dimension( :, :, :) :: ch4

and the type system prevents calling the analyze_water procedure
with a co2 or ch4 argument because the type is wrong.

But all the rest of the services available to real( real64) quantities
are available to arrays h2o, co2, ch4.



III What I have in mind

I propose that a way be defined to allow a new type to be defined
that would associate a new name with an existing type, perhaps
qualified by a kind parameter.

Thus, as above,

type, new :: name => old-type

where old-type is a type name and a possible set of kind parameters.
It does not include rank.

The new type has all the operations, assignment, i/o formats, and
intrinsic procedures as the original.  But the new name is treated
as a different type for generic resolution.  Entities of these new types
may appear in any standard-specified context as entities
of the original type.



IV (Rough) Requirements

A means be made to make a name refer to a type and possibly type
parameters that has all the assignments, operations, intrinsic procedures,
and i/o formats of the original type (or type/kind) but
is treated as distinct for purposes of disambiguation
of generic references.
