To: J3                                                     J3/18-268
From: Steve Lionel
Subject: Control of leading zero in formatted numeric output
Date: 2018-October-15

Reference: 18-007r1, 18-120r3, 18-010

Overview
--------

When using F format to output a value less than 1, the standard
allows the implementation to choose whether to include a
zero before the decimal symbol.

13.7.2.3.2 (F format) paragraph 11 says (in part):

"Leading zeros are not permitted except for an optional zero 
immediately to the left of the decimal symbol if the magnitude 
of the value in the output field is less than one. The optional 
zero shall appear if there would otherwise be no digits in the 
output field."

Similarly for E and D formats, when the scale factor is zero, 
13.7.2.3.2p11 says:

"Leading zeros are not permitted except for an optional zero 
immediately to the left of the decimal symbol if the magnitude of the 
value in the output field is less than one. The optional zero shall 
appear if there would otherwise be no digits in the output field."

EN, ES and EX formats do not have this option.

Some implementations always provide the leading zeros, some do
not, and this inconsistency results in user complaints, especially
when test programs produce different results across different
implementations. The inconsistency also occurs for G format when
the value is in a certain range, since E and F formatting is used.

Unlike the optional sign before a positive value, there is no
user control over the optional zero.

Use Cases
---------

Many users have complained over the years that this inconsistency
makes it difficult to automatically validate results across different
implementations and, in some cases where the leading zero is omitted, 
makes the output from a Fortran application unusable by applications
written in other languages.

At meeting 215, J3 agreed to add "leading zero format control" to its 
work list for Fortran 202x.

Requirements
------------

- Add control edit descriptors, analogous to the SS, SP and S edit 
  descriptors, allowing the programmer to specify whether a leading
  zero is to appear in output for the F, E, D and G formats in the 
  cases where it is currently optional.
  
  The requirement of the leading zero when otherwise no digits would 
  appear is to remain. As with the existing S control descriptor,
  one of the new descriptors selects the implementation-defined 
  behavior, which remains the default.

- Continuing the analogy with SS, SP and S, and the SIGN= OPEN/INQUIRE 
  specifier, add a new specifier to OPEN and INQUIRE to allow 
  specification or inquiry of the current mode. Like SIGN=, this
  is to be a "changeable mode" (12.5.2p1). List-directed and namelist-
  directed output are to use the current "leading zero" mode.








