To: J3                                                     J3/18-205
From: Steve Lionel
Subject: Discussion of GB043 (RANDOM_INIT)
Date: 2018-June-12

Reference: 18-007,14-184r4

Introduction
------------

DIS comment GB043 says:

"Subclause 16.7, para 4 says "It is processor
dependent whether each image uses a separate
random number generator, or if some or all images
use common random number generators." We
believe that the reason for this wording is to allow
implementations to use a separate seed on each
image, a single seed on each set of images
(perhaps those on single nodes) or a single seed
on all images (perhaps on a shared-memory
machine with a modest number of images).

The present wording for IMAGE_DISTINCT makes
sense only for the case of a separate seed on
each image - which image of a set sharing a seed
calls RANDOM_INIT has no bearing. Does a single
call of RANDOM_INIT initialize all the seeds? The
current wording suggests that only one seed is
initialized. Subclause 16.7, para 4 also says "If
RANDOM_INIT or RANDOM_SEED is called in a
segment A, and RANDOM_INIT,
RANDOM_SEED, or RANDOM_NUMBER is called
in segment B, then segments A and B shall be
ordered." If only one seed is initialized, the calls
must be in a CRITICAL construct or its equivalent,
which would be very inefficient. It would be much
better to say that a single call initializes all the
seeds and that it does not matter which image
makes the call."

The questions raised by this comment reveal inconsistencies
with how RANDOM_INIT works in the presence of multiple images.

16.7p4 (Standard generic intrinsic procedures) says:

"If RANDOM_INIT or RANDOM_SEED is called in a segment A, and
RANDOM_INIT, RANDOM_SEED, or RANDOM_NUMBER is called in segment
B, then segments A and B shall be ordered. It is processor dependent
whether each image uses a separate random number generator, or if
some or all images use common random number generators."

16.9.156 (RANDOM_NUMBER) says:

"If images use a common generator, the interleaving of values assigned
in unordered segments is processor dependent."

The primary motivation for RANDOM_INIT (see 14-184r4) was to specify
a mechanism to set the initial seed for a program to be either
repeatable (same sequence on each run) or non-repeatable (different
sequence on each run.) Both behaviors are desirable for different use
cases. For validation and debugging, you want the same sequence each
run, but in a production environment you may want different sequences
each run. F2008 left this aspect processor-dependent.

During the development of RANDOM_INIT, it became evident that it was
additionally useful to be able to specify whether different images
had different sequences or if they all had the same sequence.

The term "common generator" is ill-specified, but is taken to mean a
single sequence of random numbers drawn in turn by calls to
RANDOM_NUMBER, which may be from different images. But if there are
multiple images, the interleaving of calls to RANDOM_NUMBER is not
repeatable.

Furthermore, the option for distinct sequences on each image requires
that there NOT be a shared sequence of numbers. The only way to
support both repeatbility and image-distinct sequences is if each
image has its own sequence (and hence its own seed). If that is the
case, then it makes no sense to talk about "common generators" nor
to worry about segment ordering with RANDOM_NUMBER.

RANDOM_INIT is very important to a large subset of Fortran users,
while the notion of "common generators" is merely a possible
implementation option. Clarifying the behavior of RANDOM_INIT
effectively excludes the notion of a "common generator" and language
relating to that would need to be deleted.

It is useful to note that requiring each image to have its own
generator state removes a performance-robbing critical section
for calls to any of the RANDOM_xxx procedures.

Straw vote: Should we remove wording relating to common pseudorandom
number generators from the text so that RANDOM_INIT can work?
