To: J3                                                     J3/18-280r1
From: Salvatore Filippone & Damian Rouson & Bill Long
Subject: Constraint C825
Date: 2018-October-18
References: J3/17-200r1


Introduction
------------

Boundary data exchange is a common communication pattern in parallel
numerical solvers for linear systems, partial differential equations
(PDEs), and particle tracking, and linear algebra. In such settings,
each image responsible for a subdomain of the problem packs its local
boundary values into a buffer and exchanges the buffer with the images
responsible for neighboring subdomains.

Coarrays are a natural choice for these communication buffers. An
object-oriented extension to this approach would be to encapsulate
both the boundary data and the interior, non-boundary data for each
subdomain as components of a derived type, with the boundary data
contained in a coarray component, and the interior data contained in a
non-coarray component.  Storing the buffer in the same derived type as
the data that will be packed into the buffer clarifies the data
dependencies, making it less likely that a programmer will rely on
critical sections to manage buffer accesses. A Fortran 2018
implementation of this would have data structures of the following
form:

  type vector
    real, allocatable :: component(:),component_buffer(:)[:]
  end type

  type(vector) :: bundle, field

Unfortunately, Fortran 2018 rules fix the number of such data objects
in the program. Fixing the number of data objects at compile time is
undesirable in the context of a library designed to be installed and
used in multiple applications, and because it prevents those same
objects from being reused as components of other higher-level objects
in a sufficiently flexible way.  It is also undesirable in
applications that would need to be recompiled to allow for changing
the partitioning of the problem into subdomains.

Therefore, since each coarray image of a parallel solver may be
responsible for an arbitrary number of subdomains, the parent type
should be allocatable. However, this approach is prohibited by
constraint C825 in 18-007r1, 8.5.6 CODIMENSION attribute, which
states,

    "An entity whose type has a coarray ultimate component shall be a
     nonpointer nonallocatable scalar, shall not be a coarray, and
     shall not be a function result."

Relaxing this restriction, allowing the parent type to be an
allocatable array, would enable the above object-oriented approach.


Use Cases
---------

1.) In the Parallel Sparse Basic Linear Algebra Subroutines (PSBLAS)
library, communication buffers would ideally be coarray components
inside derived types that have other components for storing the data
prior to packing the data into the buffer. Each instance of the
derived type would represent a subdomain, and each coarray image would
be responsible for an arbitrary number of subdomains. For a problem
decomposed into 100 subdomains, the solver might look like:

  type(vector), allocatable :: bundle(:)
  allocate(bundle(100))

2.) In solving a PDE on a three-dimensional (3D) volume that is the
union of 3D subdomains, "halo exchanges" communicate values between
neighboring subdomains.  For example, in the case wherein each
subdomain receives incoming values from its nearest neighbors, it is
convenient to encapsulate a coarray buffer for which each choice of
co-indices corresponds to an In Box accessed by one nearest neighbor
and the

type subdomain
  real, allocatable :: grid_values(:,:,:)
  real, allocatable :: xy_inbox(:,:,:)[:]
  real, allocatable :: xz_inbox(:,:)[:]
  real. allocatable :: yz_inbox(:,:)[:]
end type

type(subdomain), allocatable :: T(:)

my_num_subdomains = num_subodomains / num_images()
allocate( T(my_num_subdomains) )
do i=1,size(T,1)
  allocate( T(i)%xy_inbox(nx,ny,-1:1)[*])
  allocate( T(i)%xz_inbox(nx,nz,-1:1)[*])
  allocate( T(i)%yz_inbox(ny,nz,-1:1)[*])
end do

where In Boxes are buffers for planar boundary data arriving from
neighboring subdomains in the adjacent to each subdomain.

3.) A third common use case arises in particle tracking, in which case
there is the additional complication that the size of the above
allocations will need to be adjusted at runtime depending on the
number of incoming particles.  In this context, remote images set the
size (based on the number of particles that exit their subdomains),
but images cannot allocate memory remotely so it is more like that Out
Boxes will be used to place data for pick-up by remote images.  The
details relevant to this paper, however, will be the same.


Feature suggestion and possible issues
--------------------------------------

Modify constraint C825 in order to allow derived types with coarray
ultimate components to be allocatable arrays.  The replacement C825
reads:

    "An entity whose type has a coarray ultimate component shall not
     be a pointer, shall not be a coarray, and shall not be a function
     result."



Requirements
--------------------

Coarray components are already required to be allocatable:

C746 (R737) If a <coarray-spec> appears, it shall be a
            <deferred-coshape-spec-list> and the component shall have
            the ALLOCATABLE attribute.

The example TYPE described above conforms to this requirement.

A restriction should be considered::

   A discontiguous actual array argument of a type with a coarray
   component shall not be associated with a contiguous dummy
   argument. {Prevent copy-in/copy-out.}

In an array like bundle(:) each element has a separate
coarray. Collective actions, such as allocation, on the corresponding
coarrays of the involved images have to include the set of coarrays
for the same element of bundle on each image of the current
team. Similarly, the shape of bundle(:) should be the same on each
image so that each element's coarray has a corresponding coarray on
the other images of the current team. If the parent array is
polymorphic, it should have the same dynamic type on all the images.
