To: J3                                                     J3/18-279r1
From: Tom Clune & Steve Lionel
Subject: Extending usability of deferred-length strings
Date: 2018-October-18

Reference: 18-130

1. Introduction
---------------

Deferred length strings have proven to be a very useful and popular
feature.  However, there remain several aspects in the language that
currently require fixed-length strings or allocated deferred-length
strings of sufficient length. This could/should be improved to work with
deferred-length strings.

At meeting 215, J3 approved this item for moving forward.

2. Use cases
------------

2.1 IOMSG and ERRMSG

Many Fortran statements optionally return status information in the
form of strings (IOMSG and ERRMSG).  Use of these requires that the
user provide a string of "sufficient" length, and there is no standard
mechanism to determine the necessary length.  It would be preferable
to allow these features to assign deferred-length-strings as if by
intrinsic assignment.  Unallocated strings would be allocated and
filled.  Allocated strings of different length would be
reallocated and then filled.

2.2 Intrinsics that return strings

Several intrinsic procedures (e.g., GET_COMMAND,
GET_ENVIRONMENT_VARIABLE, ...) also have intent out string arguments.
Unlike the features above, some (but not all) of these have a mechanism
to determine the necessary length.  A typical use is to then

   CALL GET_ENVIRONMENT_VARIABLE('PATH', LENGTH=n)
   ALLOCATE(CHARACTER(LEN=n) :: var)
   CALL GET_ENVIRONMENT_VARIABLE('PATH', VALUE=var)

A natural simplification would be to allow allocatable,
deferred-length strings to be passed to the intrinsic which would then
perform the necessary allocation internally, if the value length is
different from the current length (or if the variable is unallocated).
So, users could do:

   CHARACTER(LEN=:), ALLOCATABLE :: var, msg
   CALL GET_ENVIRONMENT_VARIABLE('PATH', VALUE=var, ERRMSG=msg)

If there is no error, then var would be assigned the value of
the environment variable as if by intrinsic assignment. (If msg
was also deferred-length and there is no error, it is unchanged.)


2.3 Writes to internal files

As with IOMSG and ERRMSG, there is no general mechanism for a user to
determine how long a string is required for writes to internal files.
A typical scenario is to either use a hopefully-large-enough fixed
length string (or an allocated large-enough deferred-length string)
and then trim:

   ALLOCATE (CHARACTER(LEN=MAX_LEN) :: buffer)
   WRITE(buffer, fmt) a, b, c
   buffer = TRIM(buffer)

Alternatively, IOSTAT can be used to iteratively increase the buffer
size to provide a more robust mechanism:

   INTEGER :: n, stat

   n = MIN_LENGTH
   stat = -1
   DO WHILE (stat /= 0)
      ALLOCATE (CHARACTER(LEN=MAX_LEN) :: buffer)
      WRITE(buffer, fmt, IOSTAT=stat) a, b, c
      IF (stat /= 0) DEALLOCATE(buffer)
   END DO
   buffer = TRIM(buffer)

If the buffer could instead be a deferred-length string
then the implementation could be responsible for ensuring a string of
sufficient length is allocated.  The implementation could either start
with a large allocation or even use a strategy to progressively
allocate larger strings until sufficiency is obtained.

If the io-unit is an array, however, there is no reasonable solution
to allow for reallocation as each element (record) might be a
different length.

3. Proposals

It should be noted that, if this feature is added to the standard,
a user can "opt out" by specifying 'varname(:)', thus disabling the
reallocation feature.

3a. IOMSG and ERRMSG

The current texts for IOMSG and ERRMSG (for statements) say that,
if a value is assigned, it "is assigned an explanatory message,
truncated or padded according to the rules of intrinsic assignment."

The rules of intrinsic assignment specify that if the length
type parameters differ the variable is deallocated and then reallocated
to the length of what is being assigned. The change here would be to
replace "truncated or padded according to the rules" with "as if by",
and noting this change in the Introduction.

3b. Intrinsic procedures

Character output arguments for intrinsic subroutines should have wording
added to indicate that assignment of the output value is as if by
intrinsic assignment. A note should be added to the introduction
calling this out. The list of such procedures and relevant arguments is:

DATE_AND_TIME (DATE, TIME, ZONE)
EXECUTE_COMMAND_LINE (CMDMSG)
GET_COMMAND (COMMAND, ERRMSG)
GET_COMMAND_ARGUMENT (VALUE, ERRMSG)
GET_ENVIRONMENT_VARIABLE (VALUE, ERRMSG)
MOVE_ALLOC (ERRMSG)

3c. Internal WRITE

Note: Discussion at M217 raised some concerns with the complexity
and efficiency of implementing this feature, though some members
noted that it's an aspect that the language currently provides no
help to the programmer for implementing on their own. It was
decided to say that J3 recommends this feature be added, but that
if WG5 rejects it that the features described in the previous
sections still be implemented.

JOR recommends that if the io-unit in an internal WRITE is an
unallocated deferred-length character allocatable scalar variable,
the WRITE behaves as if the record were assigned as if by intrinsic
assignment. The requirement that the variable be unallocated is
to provide consistency with the array case described in the next
paragraph. If the variable is allocated it behaves as it does in
F2008, using the current length.

JOR further recommends that the standard disallow the case of io-unit
being an unallocated deferred-length character array, as there is
no support for array elements having different lengths. If the array
is allocated, then it works the way it does in F2008 with the current
length being used.
