To: J3                                                     J3/18-230
From: Malcolm Cohen
Subject: Sequence association poorly described
Date: 2018-June-14


1. Introduction

15.5.2.11 paragraph 1 establishes the list of actual arguments that
    "represent an element sequence".
That this does not depend on the dummy argument being a class of argument
that accepts sequence association is peculiar; when the dummy is assumed-
shape, assumed-rank, allocatable, or a pointer there is no sequence
association.  There is also no sequence association for a scalar dummy
argument.

Paragraph 1 goes on to unconditionally define the "element sequence" for
all such actual arguments that are not scalar.

Paragraph 2 specifies the "element sequence" when the actual argument is
of type CHARACTER, notwithstanding that it has already been defined by
paragraph 1.  The definition in paragraph 2 differs from that of paragraph
1, which is a contradiction.

Furthermore, the definition in p2 says that the element sequence consists
of the storage units of the actual argument.  This implies that the actual
argument would be treated as having length 1... which leads to several
problems with paragraph 4:
    a) "the number of elements in the dummy argument shall not exceed the
        number of elements in the element sequence".
       E.g. when passing a CHARACTER(2) array with 10 elements, the defn
       of element sequence in p2 means the sequence has 20 elements, then
       if the dummy is say CHARACTER(5) with 20 elements, the requirment
       is not violated even though the dummy specifies 100 storage units
       vs. the 20 of the actual argument.  Elsewhere the semantics assume
       this requirement is obeyed, so this is a problem.
    b) "If the dummy argument is assumed-size, the number of elements in
        the dummy argument is exactly the number of elements in the
        element sequence." tells us that with 20 storage units in the
        actual argument, a dummy declared as CHARACTER(1000) dummy(*) has
        20 elements and thus 20000 storage units.

The only thing in p2 that acknowledges how sequence association is meant
to work for CHARACTERs is that if the *actual argument* is a substring of
an array element,
  "The storage units of an array element substring designator are viewed
   as array elements consisting of consecutive groups of storage units
   having the character length of the dummy array."
This has two problems:
    1) sequence association with an array element is intended to pass the
       entire rest of the array; it is very surprising to see from the
       wording here that in the case of a substring of an array element
       we are only passing the storage units of that substring of that
       array element.
       One might guess that this implication is not intended... and such a
       conjecture is supported by the text in paragraph 3.
    2) Grouping by the length of the dummy argument has obvious flaws
       when the dummy argument has length zero.
    3) Grouping by the length of a dummy argument with a length other
       than one directly contradicts the first sentence of this
       paragraph.
    4) If it's necessary to group by the dummy argument length in the
       substring array element designator case, why is it not necessary
       to group by the dummy argument length in other cases?

Paragraph 3 handles scalar that is not an array element (or substring of
an array element), but has the same problem as p1 in that the number of
elements in the sequence is the number of storage units in the argument.

Note that although the array element case is not subject to sequence
association for subobjects of pointers or assumed-shape arrays, this is
handled by virtue of a requirement (elsewhere) that such actual args
only get passed to scalar dummy args.  So that does not need repair.

Some of these considerations may or may not be answered by semantics
specified elsewhere, but duelling paragraphs are not a good look.

All the CHARACTER stuff does not take the possibility of a TYPE(*) dummy
argument into account.


2. Proposal

It is probably useful to have a paragraph zero that specifies that
sequence association, and the rest of this subclause, only applies
for explicit-shape and assumed-size dummy arguments.

Sequence association is available for non-default CHARACTER kinds, but the
horrible per-char semantics are only available for default/c_char.

Paragraph 1 works for everything except for default/c_char CHARACTER, and
that is horrible, so paragraph 1 should simply have
"not of type character with default or C character kind" inserted to
remove it from consideration.

Paragraph 1 also appears to work for TYPE(*) dummies when the actual is of
type CHARACTER, so that particular case should be included in paragraph 1.
This will happen automatically if the exclusion is for dummies of type
CHARACTER.

Paragraph 2 should be discarded with extreme force and rewritten from
scratch to say what we expect the element sequence to be, viz dividing
by the dummy character length; care needs to be taken when the dummy
argument has a character length that is equal to zero.

When the dummy has character length zero, perhaps the right thing to do
is to say that the element sequence length is "processor dependent but
not less than HUGE(0)".

Paragraph 3 should be included in the new paragraph 2 if that is
reasonably possible, otherwise it needs to be modified to account
for the dummy argument length, the same as in the new paragraph 2.

After those fixes, paragraph 4 can be simplified by deletion of the
condition that now appears in paragraph 0.


3. Edits to N2146

Page 320, 15.5.2.11 Sequence association, before p1,
Insert new paragraph
   "Sequence association only applies when the dummy argument is an
    explicit-shape or assumed-size array.  The rest of this subclause only
    applies in that case."

Same subclause, p1,
  Change "If the actual"
  to     "If the dummy argument is not of type character with default or
          C character kind, and the actual"
  Twice.
{Restrict the element sequence definition in p1 to exclude the tricky
 CHARACTER case.}

Same subclause, p2 and p3, delete both paragraphs.

Insert new paragraph in their place:
   "If the dummy argument is of type character with default or C character
    kind, and has nonzero character length, the storage unit sequence is
    as follows:
    - if the actual argument is an array expression, the storage units of
      the array;
    - if the actual argument is an array element or array element
      substring designator, the storage units starting from the first
      storage unit of the designator and continuing to the end of the
      array;
    - if the actual argument is scalar and not an array element or array
      element substring designator, the storage units of the scalar
      object.
    The element sequence is the sequence of consecutive groups of storage
    units in the storage unit sequence, grouped by the character length of
    the dummy array.  The sequence terminates when the number of storage
    units left is less than the character length of the dummy array."
{Define the element sequence in two steps; first get the storage unit
 sequence, then cut it up into dummy-argument-length elements.  This works
 easily for both array and scalar arguments, but only for nonzero dummy
 argument length.}

NOTE 15.32 applies to this and is now obviously correct!

After NOTE 15.32, insert new paragraph:
   "If the dummy argument is of type character with default or C character
    kind, and has zero character length, the element sequence consists of
    a sequence of elements each with zero character length, the number of
    elements being the maximum number that is supported by the processor."
{Specify what happens with zero character length.  This is not a
 particularly interesting case, the only interest here is to avoid
 spuriously specifying a dummy array size that is small, and to avoid
 the standard inadvertently dividing itself by zero.
 The processor dependency is not a new one, it is already recognised that
 a processor may have a limit on the number of elements in an array.}

In paragraph 4, delete
    "if the dummy argument is an explicit-shape or assumed-size array"
{because we already said in p0 that this whole subclause only applies in
 that case.}

===END===


