To: J3                                                     J3/19-122
From:    Van Snyder
Subject: Supporting generic programming -- updaters
Date: 2019-January-24
Reference: Minutes of 1986 X3J3 Albuquerque meeting, 04-141, 18-249

Introduction
============

In "On the Criteria for Dividing Programs into Modules" (CACM December
1972), David Parnas pointed out that a change to a program more
frequently has a cost proportional to the size of the program than to
the extent or complexity of the change.  This is because, in most
programming languages, the syntax to reference or define an object
depends upon its representation.

Parnas proposed that access to objects ought to be done only by
procedures, hiding the dependence on representation behind the uniform
syntax or procedure references.  This was the beginning of the practice
known as "information hiding," an early development of the larger
discipline of software engineering.

Douglas T. Ross had observed the problem in 1970.  Charles M. Geschke
and James T. Mitchell observed the problem in 1975.  Both proposed a
better solution: The syntax to reference an object ought not to depend
upon its representation.  Parnas's proposal caught on because it didn't
require changes to any existing languages, or converting codes to new
languages such as Mesa.

Parnas's approach is incomplete, because assignment doesn't have the
same syntax as a subroutine reference.  It is also less efficient (both
in labor and computer resources) than the proposals by Ross, Geschke,
and Mitchell.

The applicability of generic programming is not restricted to assisting
to create similar entities during progream development.  It can also
provide significant reduction in maintenance cost.

Fortran has the fortunate history that function references and array
references have the same syntax.  I proposed in 1986 that structure
component references ought also to use a function- or array-like
reference syntax, but at the time, Parnas's advice hadn't sunk in.  The
X3J3 consensus was "Fortran programmers want to see what their program
is doing and how it is doing it," which is, of course, now recognized as
unwise advice.

History
=======

On Monday 15 October at meeting 217, paper 18-249 was announced "no
action" without plenary discussion.  Meeting 217 minutes include "no use
case."  Use cases appeared in the referenced paper 04-141, and an
accompanying PDF.  The PDF file was removed from the server on Monday 15
October at meeting 217.

One simple use case is presented below.  An extended use case appears in
the accompanying PDF, which is a significant revision of the paper that
was removed from the server.

There is a companion pdf.gz for this paper.  This paper is a summary.
Read the PDF, which is a complete proposal, cast in the form of a TS,
but without edits.

Proposal
========

Provide a new variety of procedure, called an "updater" in POP-2, that
has the same syntax as a function reference, but that can appear in a
variable-definition context.  When it is invoked, a value is associated
to its "transfer" or "receiver" or "acceptor" variable, in the same way
that an actual argument is associated to a dummy argument that has
INTENT(IN).  Execution of an updater might be thought of as a "time
reversed" execution of a function reference.

Provide a new entity, called an "accessor" that explicitly couples
procedures to reference and update objects, i.e., functions and updaters,
and a new data object called an activation record.  An activation record
can have several instances, called instance variables.

Details and examples of this proposal appear in the PDF file
accompanying this paper.

The 1986 proposal to X3J3 included updaters, but not accessors and
instance variables.

Instance variables allow a single collection of functions, updaters, and
subroutines to have independent persistent states that are not
represented only by their arguments, and variables accessed by host or
use association.  Without instance variables, functions and updaters are
limited to operations on their arguments, or variables they access by
host or use association.  Without instance variables, to have
independent persistent states, other than by argument association, it is
necessary to copy functions, updaters, and subroutines to different
scoping units, either physically or by using INCLUDE statements.  A
function or updater that is accessed by host or use association is the
same entity in every scoping unit, and accesses the same scope by host
association.

If it is necessary to revise a program so that several similar objects
that need independent persistent states are represented by functions and
updaters instead of variables, it is necessary either to copy the
procedures to different scoping units, one for each persistent state,
provide the persistent state explicitly using additional arguments, or
use instance variables.  Scoping units are not allocatable, so the
"copy" strategy is limited to fixed numbers of persistent states.  If
the persistent states were to be provided using argument association,
each persistent state, a sparse matrix for example, would need to be
provided as an argument in addition to, for example, subscripts.  This
would require all references to and definitions of each original entity
to be revised.

Use case outline
================

Suppose that in a program contains a sparse array represented densely,
with explicit zeroes.  Suppose more ambitions requirements cause the
array to become so large that it needs to be represented sparsely.

References to the array are of the form A(I,J).  These can be provided
by a function.

Assignments to the array are also of the form A(I,J), in a
variable-definition context, e.g.,

  A(I,J) = 42

In order to represent the array sparsely, it becomes necessary to
replace every definition with a subroutine call, e.g.,

  call Set_A ( I, J, 42 )

This is the primary reason that modifications to a program frequently
have a cost proportional to the size of the program, not to the extent
or complexity of the revision.

The appearance of an assignment statement cannot be preserved using
defined assignment, because the subscripts cannot be passed to the
defining procedure.  It could in principle be done using left-hand
functions, i.e., A(I,J) returns a pointer.  But in

  A(I,J) = B

one does not want to create a representation for a new element in the
sparse representation for the array if an A(I,J) object does not already
exist, because B might be zero.  This cannot, however, be avoided,
because the left-hand function is not given the value to be stored.  The
reason to use a sparse representation is to avoid explicitly
representing elements whose values are zero.

An updater would allow the assignment to remain unchanged, e.g.,

  A(I,J) = 42

READ THE ACCOMPANYING PDF for more complete descriptions and examples!
