To: J3                                                     J3/19-231
From: Van Snyder & Malcolm Cohen
Subject: Formal Specifications for True Enumeration types
Date: 2019-October-09
Reference: 18-114r1 18-256r1 19-216r1 19-230


1. Introduction

This paper contains the proposed formal specifications for enumeration
types (proposal US21).  These have been extracted from 19-216r1, which
mixes together requirements and specifications, and reworded.

It is essential to refer to the Formal Requirements document when
reading this paper.

This paper does not contain the formal syntax of the feature.
Any syntax in this paper is illustrative.


2. Formal specifications

1.  [A] An enumeration type name shall be a class one name, and shall be
        treated the same as (other) derived type names.

2.  [A] An enumeration type shall have at least one enumerator.
        (Otherwise it would have no possible value.)

3.  [A] An enumeration type is a derived type that is not a structure type.
        It has no type parameters.

COMMENT: Type parameters just don't seem to make sense for enumeration
         types.

4.  [B] An enumeration type is extensible and not interoperable.
        The type definition shall have no type-bound-procedure-part.

COMMENT: We could permit a type-bound procedure part now, or permit one in
         the future. The semantics of having type-bound procedures would
         seem to make sense; however, in the interests of keeping this
         feature to a manageable size, we should not allow it now.

5.  [B] In consequence, an enumeration type cannot be a SEQUENCE or BIND(C)
        type, and that enumeration type definitions in different scoping
        units will produce different enumeration types, even if the type
        definitions themselves are textually identical. Furthermore, a
        SEQUENCE or BIND(C) type shall not contain a component that is of
        enumeration type.

        And therefore also cannot appear in EQUIVALENCE or COMMON.

6.  [B] A non-extended enumeration type definition shall list all the
        enumerators in order; the ordinal number of an enumerator is its
        position in the list.

7.  [B] An extended enumeration type definition inherits the enumerators
        from its parent type, and acts as if its list were appended to
        the parent type's list.

8.  [B] Extending an enumeration type produces another enumeration type;
        extending a structure type cannot produce an enumeration type.

9.  [A] The enumerator values of an enumeration shall have an internal
        representation that is the same as a processor-dependent integer
        kind, with the value being the same as the ordinal number of the
        enumerator.

COMMENT: This is actually merely implementation advice, so maybe this
         should be a "should" not a "shall". It is conceivable that a
         processor might want to put some extra info into an enum type,
         e.g. it might have its name, or where it was defined, etc.

10. [B,D] If the parent type has a default value, an extension may
          specify a different default value. If it does not specify a
          value, it inherits the default value from the parent type.

11. [F,G] An attribute on the type definition determines whether the
          enumerator names are declared as class one names; for example,
          NAMED_ENUMERATORS would declare all of the enumerator names, and
          UNNAMED_ENUMERATORS would declare none of them.
          In either case, the alternative syntax for denoting an enumerator
          qualified by the enumeration type name shall be available.

11.ALTERNATIVE ONE:
          Enumerator names are always declared as class one names.
          Enumeration type definitions in the same scope shall not have
          enumerators with the same name.
          Accessing enumerator names via use association works according to
          the usual rules: if a name is unique it is accessible, and if it
          is not unique it is not permitted to be accessed.

11.ALTERNATIVE TWO:
          Some magic shall happen so that enumerator names are magically
          declared if and only if they would be unique.

12. [F,G] Enumerator names that are class one names have all the usual
          class one name rules applied; in particular, they must not
          clash with any other class one name, unless they are unused
          and accessed by use association.

13. [F,G] Regardless of the syntax used to denote an enumerator, it is a
          constant expression. If the syntax is a class one name, it is
          a named constant.
14. [F,G] Accessing the name of an enumeration type by use association does
          not by itself make any of its enumerator names available.
          That is, USE,ONLY:TYPENAME only accesses TYPENAME.
          The alternative syntax for denoting an enumerator shall be
          unaffected by the accessibility of a class one enumerator name.

15. [F,G] The alternative syntax for denoting an enumerator shall involve
          the enumeration type name and no other class one name. If the
          enumeration type name is inaccessible, this syntax shall not be
          available.

16. [F,G] The accessibility of an enumerator name shall be determined
          either by explicit specification, or the operation of some
          default. The same accessibility applies both to the enumerator
          name as a class one name (if such exists) and to the alternative
          denotation syntax.

COMMENT: It is conceivable to have the accessibility as a class one name
         decoupled from the accessibility of the alternative denotation
         syntax. PRIVATE (class one) and PUBLIC (qualified) seems to make
         sense, though it is almost identical to not having a class one
         name at all; in that sense, it could be an alternative to
         controlling the class one name existence.
         However, PUBLIC (class one) and PRIVATE (qualified) does not make
         any sense, though it might be useful for confusing people.

COMMENT: The default accessibility of an enumerator could be the module's
         default accessibility or the accessibility of the enumeration type
         name, and/or controlled by a separate statement within the type
         definition. This is a matter of syntax.

17. [H] A variable of enumeration type shall be initialised only by a value
        of that enumeration type.

18. [H] Default initialisation of components that have enumeration type
        shall be allowed. If no default initialisation is specified, the
        component is nonetheless default-initialised to the default value
        for the enumeration type (if any).

19. [I] In intrinsic assignment involving enumeration type, the
        type of the variable shall be an extension type of the expression.

20. [K] The conversion mechanism from enumeration to integer shall be the
        intrinsic function INT.

21. [K] The conversion mechanism from integer to enumeration shall be the
        type constructor; note that this is NOT a structure constructor.
        As the ordinal value is not a component, it does not have a name.
OPTION 1:
        An out of range integer value causes error termination.
OPTION 2:
        The integer value is "clamped" to the range of ordinals, thus
        always producing a valid enumeration value.

21.ALTERNATIVE:
    The conversion mechanism from integer to enumeration shall be a pure
    function, implicitly defined by the type definition, with the same
    name as the type. Although this looks like a structure constructor,
    it is not a constructor but a function with named arguments.
    There shall be some optional way of returning an error status to the
    caller, with error termination on error if missing.
    The function shall be usable in constant expressions.
OPTION:
    The function shall be elemental.

22. [L] The mechanisms for enquiring the first/last enumeration values
        shall use an entity of that enumeration type. The result is a
        constant expression.

23. [M] The mechanisms for producing the "next" and "previous" values shall
        cause error termination if an error occurs.
ALTERNATIVE ONE:
        These mechanisms "clamp" the result to the enumeration range.
ALTERNATIVE TWO:
        These mechanisms have some optional way of returning an error
        status to the caller, with error termination on error if missing.

24. [N] Formatted output of enumeration values produces the name of the
        enumerator in upper case (not qualified by the type name).
        Formatted input shall accept both lower case and upper case as
        equivalent.

25. [N] Unformatted files use a processor dependent representation.

26. [O] When a SELECT CASE expression is of enumeration type, the CASE
        values shall be type-compatible (that type or an ancestor thereof).
        CASE ranges shall be available; the ordinal number of the second
        value shall be greater than or equal to the ordinal number of the
        first.

27. [C,P] If a DO index variable is of enumeration type, the variable shall
          have its type explicitly declared on the DO statement, limiting
          its scope to the DO or DO CONCURRENT construct.

27.CONSEQUENCE: This requires the enumeration type to be accessible,
                *unless* the TYPE_OF(...) feature makes it into F202x.

The remaining specifications do not refer to any particular requirement.

28. Generic resolution shall treat different enumeration types as different
    types, and different from any other type.

29. A variable of enumeration type shall not be polymorphic.

30. Argument association shall treat different enumeration types as
    different.

31. [C] TRANSFER into an enumeration type should be limited to values that
        resulted from a TRANSFER out of the same enumeration type.

===END===


