To: J3                                                     J3/19-230
From: Van Snyder & Malcolm Cohen
Subject: Formal Requirements for True Enumeration types
Date: 2019-October-09
Reference: 18-114r1 18-256r1 19-216r1


1. Introduction

This paper contains the proposed formal requirements for enumeration
types (proposal US21).  These have been extracted from 19-216r1, which
mixes together requirements and specifications, and reworded.

It is not necessary to read any of the referenced papers. To this end,
this paper contains also a Background section and a Use cases section.


2. Background

Many programming languages have enumeration types because they are
perceived to be useful.

C has "fake" enumeration types; an enumeration type is merely an alias for
a processor-dependent integer type. Enumerator names are class one names,
i.e. clash with variable/function/type names etc. However, even though the
type is merely an integer type, it is not uncommon for a C compiler to
treat it specially, in particular, producing warning messages for anomalous
usages.

ENUM,BIND(C) provides enumerators that interoperate with a C enumeration
type. As Fortran does not have type aliasing, the consequent type specifier
is the rather clunky INTEGER(KIND(one of the enumerators)). This clunkiness
makes it harder for a Fortran compiler to produce a warning message for an
anomalous usage.

Multiple other languages, such as Pascal, Modula-2, and Ada, have "proper"
enumeration types; these act like independent types and generally do not
allow assignment between each other or from integers. This approach is
believed to be safer than the "fake" approach, without losing significant
functionality or performance.


3. Some use cases

(a) A true enumeration type can be emulated with, for example,

    TYPE enum
      INTEGER,PRIVATE :: value
    END TYPE
    TYPE(enum),PUBLIC,PARAMETER :: a = enum(1), b = enum(2), c = enum(3)

however this is rather tedious to set up, and fragile if additional
enumerators are required. However, the resultant type does provide the same
functionality (and type safety) of a true enumeration type.

(b) Fake enumeration types are provided by ENUM,BIND(C).
    Apart from the general clunkiness, the implication of the syntax that
    the program is interoperating with C is inappropriate for a pure
    Fortran program (or where the enumerator is only for use on the Fortran
    side of a mixed-language program).

True enumeration types reduce errors in the following cases:

(i) In argument association, e.g.
        SUBROUTINE s(a,b,c)
    if a, b, and c are of fake enumeration type, there is no protection
    against getting the actual argument order wrong.

(ii) Type-safe expressions avoid doing silly things like multiplying an
     enumeration type by a complex value.

(iii) Type-safe assignment avoids assigning the wrong enumeration type to
      another.

Finally, true enumeration types provide
(iv) generic resolution.


4. Formal requirements

A.  Named enumeration types shall be provided.
    An enumeration type shall not be an alias for any other type,
    but is (and defines) an ordered set of named enumerators.

B.  An enumeration type shall be extensible; extending an enumeration type
    effectively appends additional enumerators to the set. Such additional
    enumerators must have names that differ from the inherited enumerators.

C.  To the greatest extent reasonably possible, a variable of enumeration
    type should not become undefined, or indeed become defined with an out
    of range (impossible) value. (This is partly a meta-requirement, as it
    inspires requirement D.)

D.  An enumeration type may specify a default value, so that a variable of
    that enumeration type will not be initially undefined (and will not be
    undefined on allocation, INTENT(OUT) association, etc). This default
    value shall operate following the same rules as default initialisation
    for components.

ALTERNATIVE D:
    An enumeration type *shall* specify a default value, etc.

E.  The type of an enumerator is the enumeration type that defines it.

F.  The name of an enumerator must be unique within the enumeration type,
    but may be the same as the name of an enumerator of another type.
    Some mechanism shall allow access to both enumerators from a scope.

G.  It shall be possible, under suitable circumstances, to denote an
    enumerator without needing to qualify it by the enumeration type name.

H.  Variables, named constants, structure components, and functions may be
    of an enumeration type.

I.  Intrinsic assignment shall be defined for enumeration type.

J.  All intrinsic relational operations shall be defined for an enumeration
    type, with both operands being the same enumeration type and the result
    as if comparing the ordinal values.
    No other intrinsic operations shall be defined for an enumeration type.

K.  Some mechanism must provide for conversion from an enumeration value
    to the integer value corresponding to its ordinal number (the first
    enumerator corresponds to integer value one). Some mechanism must
    provide for conversion from an integer value to the enumeration value
    with that ordinal number.

L.  Given an enumeration type (or possibly an entity of that type), some
    mechanism(s) shall provide the first and last enumerator values of the
    type. The mechanism for providing the first enumerator value shall not
    require conversion from integer value one.

M.  Given an enumerator value (which may be a variable), some mechanism
    shall be provided to produce the "next" or "previous" value. This
    mechanism shall not require manual conversion to/from integer.

N.  Input and output of enumeration types shall be provided.

O.  Enumeration types shall be usable as a SELECT CASE selector.

P.  DO loop control shall be able to use enumerations.

===END===
