To: J3                                                     J3/19-265
Subject: Ada (WG9) Liaison Report
From: Van Snyder
Date: 2019-October-25

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

                         Call for Contributions

              25th Ada-Europe International Conference on
               Reliable Software Technologies (AEiC 2020)

                    8-12 June 2020, Santander, Spain

                   www.ada-europe.org/conference2020

          Organized by University of Cantabria and Ada-Europe

                  #AdaEurope #AEiC2020 #AdaProgramming

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

*** General Information

The 25th Ada-Europe International Conference on Reliable Software
Technologies (AEiC 2020 aka Ada-Europe 2020) will take place in
Santander, Spain, in the week of 8-12 June.  The conference schedule
includes a technical program and vendor exhibition, and parallel
tutorials and workshops.

The 2020 edition of the conference continues the major revamp
in the registration fees introduced in 2019, redesigned to extend
participation from industry and academia, and to reward contributors,
especially but not solely, students and post-doc researchers.

*** Schedule

7 January 2020: Submission of journal-track papers, industrial
                presentation outlines, and tutorial and workshop
                proposals

20 March 2020:  Notification of acceptance for journal-track papers,
                industrial presentations, tutorials and workshops

31 March 2020:  Submission of Work-in-Progress (WiP) papers

30 April 2020:  Notification of acceptance for WiP papers

*** Topics

The conference is a leading international forum for providers,
practitioners and researchers in reliable software technologies.
The conference presentations will illustrate current work in the
theory and practice of the design, development and maintenance of
long-lived, high-quality software systems for a challenging variety of
application domains.  The program will allow ample time for keynotes,
Q&A sessions and discussions, and social events.  Participants include
practitioners and researchers from industry, academia and government
organizations active in the promotion and development of reliable
software technologies.

The topics of interest for the conference include but are not
limited to:

- Design and Implementation of Real-Time and Embedded Systems:
  Real-Time Scheduling, Design Methods and Techniques, Architecture
  Modelling, HW/SW Co-Design, Reliability and Performance;

- Design and Implementation of Mixed-Criticality Systems: Scheduling
  Methods, Mixed-Criticality Architectures, Design Methods, Analysis
  Methods;

- Theory and Practice of High-Integrity Systems: Medium to Large-Scale
  Distribution, Fault Tolerance, Security, Reliability, Trust and
  Safety, Languages Vulnerabilities;

- Software Architectures for Reliable Systems: Design Patterns,
  Frameworks, Architecture-Centered Development, Component-based
  Design and Development;

- Methods and Techniques for Quality Software Development and
  Maintenance: Requirements Engineering, Model-driven Architecture and
  Engineering, Formal Methods, Re-engineering and Reverse Engineering,
  Reuse, Software Management Issues, Compilers, Libraries, Support
  Tools;

- Ada Language and Technologies: Compilation Issues, Runtimes,
  Ravenscar, Profiles, Distributed Systems, SPARK;

- Mainstream and Emerging Applications with Reliability
  Requirements: Manufacturing, Robotics, Avionics, Space, Health
  Care, Transportation, Cloud Environments, Smart Energy Systems,
  Serious Games, etc;

- Achieving and Assuring Safety in Machine Learning Systems;

- Experience Reports in Reliable System Development: Case Studies
  and Comparative Assessments, Management Approaches, Qualitative
  and Quantitative Metrics;

- Experiences with Ada: Reviews of the Ada 2012 language features,
  implementation and use issues, positioning in the market and in the
  software engineering curriculum, lessons learned on Ada Education
  and Training Activities with bearing on any of the conference topics.

*** Call for Journal-Track Papers

The journal-track papers submitted to the conference are full-length
papers that must describe mature research work on the conference
topics.  They must be original and shall undergo anonymous peer review.

Accepted journal-track papers will get a presentation slot within
a technical session of the conference and they will be published in
an open-access special issue of the Journal of Systems Architecture
with no additional costs to authors.

The corresponding authors shall submit their work by 7 January 2020
via the Special Issue web page:
https://www.journals.elsevier.com/journal-of-systems-architecture/
call-for-papers/advances-in-reliable-software-technologies

*** Call for WiP-Track Papers

The Work-in-Progress papers (WiP-track) are short (4-page) papers
describing evolving and early-stage ideas or new research directions.
They must be original and shall undergo anonymous peer review.
The corresponding authors shall submit their work by 31 March 2020, via
https://easychair.org/conferences/?conf=aeic2020, strictly in PDF and
following the Ada User Journal style (http://www.ada-europe.org/auj/).

Authors of accepted WiP-track papers will get a presentation slot
within a regular technical session of the conference and will also
be requested to present a poster.  The papers will be published in
the Ada User Journal as part of the proceedings of the Conference.

The conference is listed in the principal citation databases,
including DBLP, Scopus, Web of Science, and Google Scholar.  The Ada
User Journal is indexed by Scopus and by EBSCOhost in the Academic
Search Ultimate database.

*** Call for Industrial Presentations

The conference seeks industrial presentations that deliver
insightful information value but may not sustain the strictness
of the review process required for regular papers.  The authors
of industrial presentations shall submit their proposals, in the
form of a short (one or two pages) abstract, by 7 January 2020, via
https://easychair.org/conferences/?conf=aeic2020, strictly in PDF and
following the Ada User Journal style (http://www.ada-europe.org/auj/).

The Industrial Committee will review the submissions anonymously and
make recommendations for acceptance.  The abstract of the accepted
contributions will be included in the conference booklet, and authors
will get a presentation slot within a regular technical session of
the conference.

These authors will also be invited to expand their contributions
into articles for publication in the Ada User Journal, as part of
the proceedings of the Industrial Program of the Conference.

*** Awards

Ada-Europe will offer an honorary award for the best presentation.

*** Call for Educational Tutorials

The conference is seeking tutorials in the form of educational seminars
including hands-on or practical demonstrations.  Proposed tutorials
can be from any part of the reliable software domain, they may be
purely academic or from an industrial base making use of tools used in
current software development environments.  We are also interested in
contemporary software topics, such as IoT and artificial intelligence
and their application to reliability and safety.

Tutorial proposals shall include a title, an abstract, a description
of the topic, an outline of the presentation, the proposed duration
(half day or full day), and the intended level of the tutorial
(introductory, intermediate, or advanced).  All proposals should be
submitted by e-mail to the Educational Tutorial Chair.

The authors of accepted full-day tutorials will receive a complimentary
conference registration.  For half-day tutorials, this benefit is
halved.  The Ada User Journal will offer space for the publication
of summaries of the accepted tutorials.

*** Call for Workshops

Workshops on themes that fall within the conference scope may be
proposed.  Proposals may be submitted for half- or full-day events, to
be scheduled at either end of the conference days.  Workshop proposals
should be submitted by e-mail to the Workshop Chair.  The workshop
organizer shall also commit to producing the proceedings of the event,
for publication in the Ada User Journal.

*** Call for Exhibitors

The commercial exhibition will span the core days of the main
conference.  Vendors and providers of software products and services
should contact the Exhibition Chair for information and for allowing
suitable planning of the exhibition space and time.

*** Special Registration Fees

Authors of accepted contributions and all students will enjoy reduced
registration fees.

*** Venue

Santander is a nice tourist city in the north of Spain, with a
well-connected airport and at a 100 km drive from Bilbao airport.

The conference venue and hotel is the Bahia Hotel in the city center
and beside Santander bay.

*** Organizing Committee

* Conference Chair
Michael Gonzalez Harbour, Universidad de Cantabria, Spain
mgh at unican.es

* Program Chair
Mario Aldea Rivas, Universidad de Cantabria, Spain
aldeam at unican.es

* Work-in-Progress Chair
Kristoffer Nyborg Gregertsen, SINTEF Digital, Norway
kristoffer.gregertsen at sintef.no

* Tutorial & Workshop Chair
Jorge Garrido Balaguer, Universidad Politecnica de Madrid, Spain
jorge.garrido at upm.es

* Industrial Chair
Patricia Balbastre Betoret, Universitat Politecnica de Valencia, Spain
patricia at ai2.upv.es

* Exhibition & Sponsorship Chair
Ahlan Marriott, White Elephant GmbH, Switzerland
software at white-elephant.ch

* Publicity Chair
Dirk Craeynest, Ada-Belgium & KU Leuven, Belgium
dirk.craeynest at cs.kuleuven.be

*** Previous Editions

Ada-Europe organizes annual international conferences since the early
80's.  This is the 25th event in the Reliable Software Technologies
series, previous ones being held at Montreux, Switzerland ('96),
London, UK ('97), Uppsala, Sweden ('98), Santander, Spain ('99),
Potsdam, Germany ('00), Leuven, Belgium ('01), Vienna, Austria
('02), Toulouse, France ('03), Palma de Mallorca, Spain ('04), York,
UK ('05), Porto, Portugal ('06), Geneva, Switzerland ('07), Venice,
Italy ('08), Brest, France ('09), Valencia, Spain ('10), Edinburgh, UK
('11), Stockholm, Sweden ('12), Berlin, Germany ('13), Paris, France
('14), Madrid, Spain ('15), Pisa, Italy ('16), Vienna, Austria ('17),
Lisbon, Portugal ('18), and Warsaw, Poland ('19).

Information on previous editions of the conference can be found at
http://www.ada-europe.org/confs/ae.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Our apologies if you receive multiple copies of this announcement.
Please circulate widely.

Dirk.Craeynest@cs.kuleuven.be, Ada-Europe 2020 Publicity Chair

*** 25th Ada-Europe Int'l. Conf. on Reliable Software Technologies ***
June 8-12, 2020 * Santander, Spain * www.ada-europe.org/conference2020


