To: J3                                                     J3/19-214
From:    Van Snyder & Malcolm Cohen
Subject: Protected components: Requirements and Specifications
Date: 2019-August-08
Reference: 19-135r1 19-161

Introduction
============

"Good" software engineering practice considers that one should access
and change aspects of a data structure using procedures.

Examining components of a derived type "should" be accomplished only
using functions.

The functions are trivial.  Providing such trivial functions is tedious.
Invoking them has more cost than excuting them.  For this reason, the
advice to access the "protected" components using functions is
frequently ignored.

Updating the "protected" components directly in an undisciplined way
might, however, put the data structure into an inconsistent state.  So
procedures to update them are frequently provided.

One must exercise some discipline only to reference them, and not be
tempted to update them.  Such discipline might slip away during
maintenance.

Therefore it would be useful to allow a specification that such
"protected" components can only be examined outside the module where
their type is defined, to avoid "accidentally" updating them,
potentially putting the data structure into an inconsistent state --
especially as a consequence of maintenance.

Requirements
============

Allow to declare an attribute of a type component that specifies that
its value cannot be changed outside the module wherein the type is
defined.  This has ramifications beyond intrinsic assignment:

1.  Input
2.  INTENT(OUT)
3.  ALLOCATE ( ... source= ... )

Specifications
==============

A. A variable that has a protected component shall not appear in a
   variable-definition context, except within the module wherein its
   type is defined.

B. A protected component shall not appear in a variable-definition
   context, except within the module wherein its type is defined.

C. A local variable with protected components is allowed outside the
   module in which the type is defined.
   - If some action is needed when the variable goes out of scope (and
     is thus destroyed unless it has the SAVE attribute) its type should
     have a final procedure.

D. A local pointer of a type with a protected component is allowed
   outside the module in which the type is defined.
   - Otherwise use case 2.1 in 19-135r1 is not satisfied.

E. Deallocating an object with a protected component outside the module
   in which the type is defined is prohibited.
   - Otherwise for pointer, use case 2.1 in 19-135r1 is not satisfied.
   - Allowing it for remote/dummy allocatable would prohibit an
     allocatable variable in the module where the type is defined to be
     PUBLIC. PROTECTED attribute for the object would prevent modifying
     nonprotected components.
   - Allowing for local allocatable breaks rule (A) about not appearing
     in a variable definition context.

F. Allocating an object with protected components outside the module in
   which the type is defined is prohibited.
   - Pointer would almost certainly leak memory.
   - Allowing for remote/dummy allocatable would have same problems as
     (E).
   - Allowing for local allocatable would have same problems as (E).

G. A protected component or a subobject of a protected component can
   only be argument associated with INTENT(IN) dummy, even if the
   referenced procedure is in the module in which the type is defined.

H. A protected component or subobject of a protected component cannot be
   the target in a pointer assignment outside the module, as that would
   lose the protection.

I. A protected component or subobject of a protected component cannot be
   allocated or explicitly deallocated except within the module in which
   the type is defined.
   - Otherwise it's too easy to bypass the protection.
   - Automatic deallocation on scope exit will invoke any final
     procedure for the object as a whole.

J. A dummy variable of a type with a protected component can be
   INTENT(IN) or INTENT(INOUT) in any procedure anywhere.  A dummy
   variable of such a type shall not have INTENT(OUT) or unspecified
   intent except within the module in which the type is defined.

K. Can modify (or allocate/deallocate) an unprotected component anywhere
   (provided it's not a subobject of a protected component, or subject to
   some other rule).

L. No intrinsic assignment to an object that has a protected component,
   or to a protected component or subobject thereof, outside the module
   in which the protected component is defined.  (These are all covered
   by the "shall not appear in a variable definition context" rule in
   the Formal Requirements in 19-135r1.)

M. A function defined outside the module may have a result variable of a
   type with a protected component.
   - This is same as ordinary local variables (case A).
   - The function result shall not be a pointer.
   - The function result will (hopefully) be finalised after its use.

N. Structure constructor outside the module in which the type is allowed
   if and only if no value is supplied for any protected component
   (otherwise this would subvert the module's control over what values
   are acceptable in the protected component).

O. Another type may have a component of a type that has a protected
   component.
   - The protection rules apply to types with "protected potential
     subobject components" not just types with immediate protected
     components.

P. Extension of a type that has a protected component is permitted.

Q. An extension type shall not have a protected component if the parent
   type does not have a protected component.
   - Intrinsic assignment to a CLASS(*) ALLOCATABLE is prohibited if the
     dynamic type has a protected component.
   - NOTE: these are the same restrictions as for EVENT_TYPE and
     LOCK_TYPE.

R. Type-wide default protected/unprotected status, like PRIVATE, is
   provided.  Default is not protected. PROTECTED statement changes the
   default. UNPROTECTED and PROTECTED attributes in a component
   definition stmt confirm or override the default.

S. An object with a protected component is prohibited to be the target
   of an unlimited polymorphic pointer.
   - This rule applies even inside the module, even if the polymorphic
     pointer is private, because its target might thereafter become
     associated with a public polymorphic pointer.

T. If an actual argument with a protected component is associated with
   an unlimited polymorphic dummy, the dummy shall have INTENT(IN) or
   INTENT(INOUT) and shall not have TARGET (or POINTER, which implies
   TARGET).
   - If the dummy has TARGET it might become associated with an
     unlimated polymorphic pointer.
   - If the dummy has POINTER, its target might eventually
     become associated with an unlimited polymorphic pointer (see P.)

U. SEQUENCE and BIND(C) types shall not have protected components.
   - This includes any level of component selection, because
     non-SEQUENCE types are not allowed in SEQUENCE, and similarly
     BIND(C)).

V. The definition status of a protected ultimate component shall not be
   changed my means other than Fortran.

Z. Additional non-constraint rule, to address the things that cannot be
   reliably detected at compile time:
        A protected structure component of a nonpointer nonallocatable
        unsaved variable shall not have its definition status changed
        outside the module where the component is defined, except that
        on entry to a procedure, a default-initialised component of a
        local variable may become defined, and on exit from the
        procedure, the component may become undefined.
   (Not quite bullet-proof standardese, but indicates the idea.)

===END===
