To: J3                                                     J3/20-123
From: Robert Corbett
Subject: Edits for procedure pointer association
Date: 2020-February-27
Reference: 18-007r1


Introduction
------------

The Fortran standard currently specifies ways in which a
procedure pointer can become associated with a dummy
procedure.  A procedure pointer should never be associated
with a dummy procedure.  An example of code that is not
conformant under the current standard is

      PROGRAM MAIN
        EXTERNAL FPT
        POINTER FPT
        CALL SETFPT(SQRT)
        PRINT *, FPT(4.0)
      CONTAINS
        SUBROUTINE SETFPT(PROC)
          EXTERNAL PROC
          FPT => PROC
        END SUBROUTINE SETFPT
      END

The pointer FPT should become associated with the intrinsic
SQRT, but it currently becomes associated with PROC.  When
the program returns from SETFPT, FPT has undefined pointer
association status.


1. Description
   -----------

The standard says that if the pointer target of a procedure
pointer assignment is not a pointer, the pointer object
becomes associated with the pointer target [10.2.2.4p1,
167:1].  That is correct if the pointer target is not a
dummy argument.  If the pointer target is a dummy argument,
the pointer object should become associated with the
ultimate argument associated with the dummy argument, not
with the dummy argument itself.  An edit is supplied to
correct this oversight.

Dummy procedures passed as actual arguments to dummy
procedure pointers (15.5.2.9) create a similar problem.
An edit is supplied to correct this oversight.


2. Edits
   -----

10.2.2.4 "Procedure pointer assignment", paragraph 1,
page 167:2
Replace "If the pointer target ... the pointer target."
with
 "If the pointer target is not a pointer or a dummy argument,
  the pointer object becomes associated with the pointer
  target.  If the pointer target is a nonpointer dummy
  argument, the pointer object becomes associated with the
  ultimate argument associated with the dummy argument."


15.5.2.9 "Actual arguments associated with dummy procedure
entities", paragraph 5, page 309:21.
Replace "INTENT(IN) ... with the actual argument."
with
 "INTENT(IN); it becomes pointer associated with the actual
  argument if the actual argument is not a dummy argument,
  and otherwise with the ultimate argument associated with
  the actual argument." 

------------------------
