To: J3                                                     J3/20-121
From: Zach Jibben & Srinath Vadlamani
Subject: Protected components: specifications & syntax
Date: 2020-February-27
Reference: 19-214r1 19-161 19-135r1 20-106


1. Introduction
===============

This paper contains the formal specifications & syntax for protected
components of a type. This supersedes the specifications outlined by
19-214r1, as the result of subgroup discussion, in which we decided the
restrictions on type extension were too drastic. Furthermore, this
clarifies the possibility of using protected in combination with private
and public access specifiers. In particular, requirements L and Q have been
modified, and new requirements L2 and AA were added.

Although this is a formal syntax paper, the syntax will be defined by prose
and by example, not by BNF. This is to aid comprehension without having to
expand a set of BNF rules in one's head.


2. Specifications
=================

A. A variable whose declared type has a protected component shall not
   appear in a variable-definition context, except within the module
   wherein its type is defined.

B. A protected component shall not appear in a variable-definition
   context, except within the module wherein its type is defined.

C. A local variable with protected components is allowed outside the
   module in which the type is defined.
   - If some action is needed when the variable goes out of scope (and
     is thus destroyed unless it has the SAVE attribute) its type should
     have a final procedure.

D. A local pointer of a type with a protected component is allowed
   outside the module in which the type is defined.
   - Otherwise use case 2.1 in 19-135r1 is not satisfied.

E. Deallocating an object with a protected component outside the module
   in which the type is defined is prohibited.
   - Otherwise for pointer, use case 2.1 in 19-135r1 is not satisfied.
   - Allowing it for remote/dummy allocatable would prohibit an
     allocatable variable in the module where the type is defined to be
     PUBLIC. PROTECTED attribute for the object would prevent modifying
     nonprotected components.
   - Allowing for local allocatable breaks rule (A) about not appearing
     in a variable definition context.

F. Allocating an object with protected components outside the module in
   which the type is defined is prohibited.
   - Pointer would almost certainly leak memory.
   - Allowing for remote/dummy allocatable would have same problems as
     (E).
   - Allowing for local allocatable would have same problems as (E).

G. A protected component or a subobject of a protected component can
   only be argument associated with INTENT(IN) dummy, even if the
   referenced procedure is in the module in which the type is defined.

H. A protected component or subobject of a protected component cannot be
   the target in a pointer assignment outside the module, as that would
   lose the protection.

I. A protected component or subobject of a protected component cannot be
   allocated or explicitly deallocated except within the module in which
   the type is defined.
   - Otherwise it's too easy to bypass the protection.
   - Automatic deallocation on scope exit will invoke any final
     procedure for the object as a whole.

J. A dummy variable of a type with a protected component can be
   INTENT(IN) or INTENT(INOUT) in any procedure anywhere.  A dummy
   variable of such a type shall not have INTENT(OUT) or unspecified
   intent except within the module in which the type is defined.

K. Can modify (or allocate/deallocate) an unprotected component anywhere
   (provided it's not a subobject of a protected component, or subject to
   some other rule).

L. No intrinsic assignment to an object that has a protected component,
   or to a protected component or subobject thereof, outside the module
   in which the protected component is defined.  (These are all covered
   by the "shall not appear in a variable definition context" rule in
   the Formal Requirements in 19-135r1.)

L2. Polymorphic allocatable assignment of a parent type without a
    protected component is permitted even when the dynamic type has a
    protected component.
   - This presents a loophole which may allow a programmer to write to a
     protected component outside the module in which it is defined.
     However, subgroup did not like the alternative of disallowing
     protected components in extensions of parent types without any
     protected component.

M. A function defined outside the module may have a result variable of a
   type with a protected component.
   - This is same as ordinary local variables (case A).
   - The function result shall not be a pointer.
   - The function result will (hopefully) be finalised after its use.

N. Structure constructor outside the module in which the type is allowed
   if and only if no value is supplied for any protected component
   (otherwise this would subvert the module's control over what values
   are acceptable in the protected component).

O. Another type may have a component of a type that has a protected
   component.
   - The protection rules apply to types with "protected potential
     subobject components" not just types with immediate protected
     components.

P. Extension of a type that has a protected component is permitted.

Q. An extension type may have a protected component even if the parent type
   does not have a protected component. Requiring the parent type to
   have a protected component is too restricted for many uses.

R. Type-wide default protected/unprotected status, like PRIVATE, is
   provided.  Default is not protected. PROTECTED statement changes the
   default. UNPROTECTED and PROTECTED attributes in a component
   definition stmt confirm or override the default.

S. An object with a protected component is prohibited to be the target
   of an unlimited polymorphic pointer.
   - This rule applies even inside the module, even if the polymorphic
     pointer is private, because its target might thereafter become
     associated with a public polymorphic pointer.

T. If an actual argument with a protected component is associated with
   an unlimited polymorphic dummy, the dummy shall have INTENT(IN) or
   INTENT(INOUT) and shall not have TARGET (or POINTER, which implies
   TARGET).
   - If the dummy has TARGET it might become associated with an
     unlimited polymorphic pointer.
   - If the dummy has POINTER, its target might eventually
     become associated with an unlimited polymorphic pointer (see P.)

U. SEQUENCE and BIND(C) types shall not have protected components.
   - This includes any level of component selection, because
     non-SEQUENCE types are not allowed in SEQUENCE, and similarly
     BIND(C)).

V. The definition status of a protected ultimate component shall not be
   changed by means other than Fortran.

Z. Additional non-constraint rule, to address the things that cannot be
   reliably detected at compile time:
        A protected structure component of a nonpointer nonallocatable
        unsaved variable shall not have its definition status changed
        outside the module where the component is defined, except that
        on entry to a procedure, a default-initialised component of a
        local variable may become defined, and on exit from the
        procedure, the component may become undefined.
   (Not quite bullet-proof standardese, but indicates the idea.)

AA. A component may be PROTECTED and PRIVATE or PROTECTED and PUBLIC.
    - Since intrinsic assignment is prohibited on types which contain
      protected components, then a private, protected component acts to
      prevent intrinsic assignment without adding new exposed data members.


3. Syntax
=========

One may add the PROTECTED attribute to component definitions.

    type :: foo
      real, protected :: a
      real, private, protected :: b
      real, public, protected :: c
    end type foo

The requirement R allows a type-wide PROTECTED status, which may be
overridden for an individual component using the UNPROTECTED attribute.

    type :: foo
      protected
      real :: a
      real, unprotected :: b
    end type foo

The attributes PRIVATE and PROTECTED may be used together for all
components:

    type :: foo
      private
      protected
      real :: a
      integer :: b
    end type foo

===END===
