To: J3                                                     J3/21-101
From: Richard Bleikamp
Subject: UTI-008
Date: 2021-January-15

Reference: 20-134, 20-155r1

Historical context and personal ramblings: 
After considering the discussion about 20-155r1 at meeting 222,
I believe there are two reasonable approaches to resolving UTI-008.
  1) Allow output of BOZ literal constants as in 20-155r1,
     but NOT in list directed output.  In a list-directed output
     statement, one can always enclose the BOZ literal constant list
     item in quotes or apostrophes (whichever was not used in the BOZ
     literal constant itself) to achieve the desired affect.

  2) disallow BOZ literal constants as output list items, in all
     formatted output statements.  The user can usually use an
     INT(boz-literal-constant) intrinsic call as the list item to
     achieve a similar effect, with an appropriately chosen Zw.d
     edit descriptor (or O or B edit descriptor as needed). 

The discussion and edits below are essentially the same as
20-155r1 (but against 21-007), with the edits for list-directed I/O
removed.

An alternative second set of edits is included at the end to remove
boz-literal-constants as a valid output list item in all formatted
output statements.  The author's intent is to move the first
alternative edits at meeting 223, and only if there appears to be
unsurmountable problems will the alternative second set of edits be
moved, allowing UTI-008 to be resolved, one way or another.
--------------------------------------------------------------------
Unresolved techical issue 008 covers two problems with output of
BOZ constants.
  1) output of a value too large for the specified field width is
     currently very different than other output editing, instead of
     producing "*"s, the value is truncated.

  2) the case when the specified field width is zero (Z0) is well
     defined, but perhaps not appropriate/useful for this data type.
     The form "Z8.8" could be used to get the desired effect, but 
     requires the user to count the number of bits in the constant,
     and do the math to know how wide the field should be for the
     chosen edit descriptor.

Proposed solution:

  1) print "*"s when the value to be printed has non-zero characters
     truncated so it fits in the specified field width.

  2) allow the field width "w" to be omitted, for output of
     boz-literal-constants only.  When "w" is absent, the processor
     chooses a field width that avoids truncating any leading zero
     bits, similar to how the "A" edit descriptor picks the minimal
     size field width to print the whole character string,
     including trailing blanks.  

     w=0 still acts more like I0, just using hex/octal/binary,
     leading zero bits are truncated, but one zero bit is retained
     when the boz-literal-constant is entirely zero bits. (avoid
     printing "", instead of "0", when w is zero and the list item
     item is only zero bits.

Intended effect:

  1) users that think BOZ constants are just integers, can use
     Zn.  Z0 will pick a minimal field width (trim leading
     zero bits), and Zw.n will act like the I edit descriptor,
     more or less.  Zw.m, when w equals m, and w/m are the correct
     value for the size of the BOZ constant, will act like the 
     new proposed option, "Z" without a field width.

  2) users that think BOZ constants are just a string of bits, and
     zeros are just as interesting as ones, can use "Z" without a
     field width, and get all the bits, zeros and ones, represented
     in the output.  They can also use "Zw.m" where w equals m, and
     w/m are the smallest value that lets the entire BOZ constant,
     including leading zeros, be represented in the output.

Note that UTI 009 addresses the issue with BOZ constants not being
permitted as list items.

----------
EDITS to 21-007 for ALTERNATIVE 1
[266:24] and
[267:1]  and
[267:2]
  replace "w [ . m ]" with "[ w [ . m ]]"

[267:19] delete "B, O, Z, "  (no constraint checking)

[271:4] 
  delete the sentence "The B, ...  boz-literal-constants."

[271:27-32] delete all of list item (8), and renumber the rest

[271:32+] Delete Unresolved Technical Issue 008

[277:28] (section header 13.7.2.4) 
  add "numeric " before "editing"

[278:12] 
  replace
    "bits."
  with
    "bits, except a single zero bit is retained if the 
     internal value consists of all zero bits."
     
[278:19+] Start a new section, 13.7.3, renumbering as needed.

  Insert 
    "13.7.3 B, O, and Z editing for boz-literal-constant list items

     A boz-literal-constant list item that is edited with a
     B, Bw, Bw.m, O, Ow, Ow.m, Z, Zw, or Zw.m edit
     descriptor, is edited using these rules.

     (1) The field width specifier w may be omitted, or specified
         with a value greater than or equal to zero.

     (2) When a value greater than zero is specified for the field
         width specifier w, that value is used for the actual field
         width, and if the length of the boz-literal-constant with
         leading zero bits removed cannot be accurately represented
         in that field width, the processor shall fill the entire
         field of width w with asterisks.

     (3) When a value of zero is specified for the field width
         specifier w, the processor selects the smallest positive
         actual field width that can accurately represent the
         boz-literal-constant with leading zero bits removed,
         except a single zero bit is retained if the internal
         value consists of all zero bits.

     (4) When the field width specifier w is omitted, the processor
         chooses the smallest positive actual field width that can
         represent the entire boz-literal-constant, including all
         leading zero bits.

     (5) The expected length of the bit sequence is the actual field
         width, times three for an O edit descriptor and times four
         for a Z edit descriptor.  If the bit sequence in the
         boz-literal-constant has a length that is less than the
         expected length, it is treated as if it were extended to
         the expected length by padding on the left with zero bits."

     (6) Output editing is performed described in 13.7.2.4, except
         leading zero bits are kept when the field width specifier
         w is not present."
         
[288:10+] add this new paragraph (this is in the list directed output
          section)
    "A boz-literal-constant may not appear as an effective list item
     in a list directed output statement."

[270:32+] Delete Unresolved Technical Issue 008
--- END OF EDITS, alternative 1
--- START OF EDITS, alternative 2

[240:11+]: add a new paragraph
    "An output list shall not contain an effective list item that is
     a boz-literal-constant."

[271:4]: delete the sentence
    "The B, O, and Z edit descriptors can also be used to specify the
     output of boz-literal-constants."

[271:27-32]: delete list item (8)

[271:32+] Delete Unresolved Technical Issue 008
--- END OF EDITS, alternative 2


