To: J3                                                     J3/21-104r1
From: Richard Bleikamp & JoR & John Reid
Subject: system_clock()
Date: 2021-February-22

#Reference:

This r1 paper includes an updated NOTE for option 2.

ALSO note that a different paper, 21-117, uploaded Monday afternoon on
Feb 22, contains a similar but more intrusive proposal, with normative
edits, to address these same issues.  JoR expects to either have a
straw vote to choose one approach, or move 21-117 first, and only
move this paper if 21-117 meets substantial opposition.

After reviewing the many comments in email (J3 and JOR subgroup) about
the system_clock intrinsic, and after subgroup discussions, a NOTE is
proposed to guide users in how to get the "best" functionality from
system_clock(), meaning a simple consistently portable usage model that
also allows for accessing the "faster" clock when a processor has added
an extension to the language to support multiple clocks per image.

Since subgroup was divided on how much explanation was appropriate,
edits for two different options for the NOTE are proposed, we plan to
take a committee straw vote and "move" the more popular option.

Quick summary of some of the points from the many emails.  My
apologies to anyone whose position is mis-represented, or not
represented.  Not in chronological order.
  - Malcolm and some others: the standard is clear, consistent, and not
    broken.  An image may have at most one clock, anything else is
    an extension, defined by the processor.

  - Many implementations now offer an extension to the language, of
    several "different" clocks (or a scaled clock rate), in the same
    image, based on the kind type parameter of one or more of the
    arguments to system_clock.  Which particular argument is used to
    select which clock, in the presence or absence of other arguments,
    is not entirely consistent across all processors.

  - Allowing a better/more precise system clock to be used was the
    intent of allowing non-default kind integers as arguments to
    SYSTEM_CLOCK(), but the current normative text only allows one
    clock per image.  A processor could choose to only support
    "larger kind" arguments, and not support default kind integers,
    but no processor does that now.

    Some processors keep the same rate, and adjust the count_max
    value to fit in the user supplied argument.  Other processors
    scale the count_rate for smaller integer arguments.

  - It is generally agreed that passing small (1-2 byte) integer
    arguments to system_clock is inappropriate for most (all?)
    processors.  Such arguments will either cause system_clock to
    report NO CLOCK EXISTS, or return values that are difficult to use
    reliably since the COUNT value returned wraps around to zero
    when COUNT_MAX is reached by the internal clock.

Planned STRAW VOTE: should we choose option 1, or option 2 below?
  a) Option 1
  b) Option 2
  c) Undecided

EDITS: against 21-007, only one of the options below will be moved for
a vote.

-----
Option 1, a simple suggestion to the user

[437,21+], add this NOTE
NOTE
  Many systems have a clock that is too fast to be supported with
  default integers. It is therefore recommended that in invocations of
  SYSTEM_CLOCK all integer arguments have decimal exponent range at
  least 18 and the argument COUNT_RATE be double precision real if it
  is real.

----- End of option 1

OR Option 2, adds a brief explanation of why the suggested usage model
is recommended.

[437,21+], add this NOTE
NOTE
  Many systems have a clock that is too fast to be supported with
  default integers. It is therefore recommended that in all
  invocations of SYSTEM_CLOCK, all integer arguments have the same
  decimal exponent range, of at least 18, and if the argument
  COUNT_RATE is of type real, that it be double precision.

  Using SYSTEM_CLOCK in this manner may minimize how often the
  returned COUNT "rolls over" and improve portability for processors
  that have extended SYSTEM_CLOCK by using a different clock or
  scaling the clock rate when the arguments passed to SYSTEM_CLOCK
  have a smaller kind type parameter.

---- end of Option 2
