To: J3                                                     J3/23-110
From: Steve Lionel
Subject: Emeritus Member status for Bob Corbett
Date: 2023-January-19

1. Introduction

Following Bob Corbett's departure from J3, he is now eligible to be
considered for Emeritus Member status. INCITS describes this status as
follows in Section 3.9.3.4 ("Emeritus Members") of the INCITS Organization,
Policies and Procedures document:

"The Emeritus Member title recognizes individuals for their extensive
contribution to standards activities and enables INCITS to call on their
extensive history and talent for continuity following their retirement from
the ICT industry."

Emeritus Members hold non-voting memberships in J3. In order for Bob to
receive Emeritus Member status, J3 must resolve to recommend such status to
the INCITS Secretariat. A vote to approve this paper will be considered
resolution to make such a recommendation.


2. Letter of Recommendation to INCITS Secretariat

A letter with J3's recommendation for Emeritus Member status for Bob 
Corbett is copied below, and will be submitted to the INCITS Secretariat 
if this paper is passed.

----------

INCITS/Fortran Technical Committee

February 25, 2023

InterNational Committee for Information Technology Standards (INCITS)
Secretariat: Information Technology Industry Council (ITI)
1101 K Street NW, Suite 610, Washington, DC 20005

Dear INCITS Secretariat:

The INCITS/Fortran Technical Committee would like to recommend Robert
Corbett for consideration of Emeritus Member.

Robert joined the Fortran committee in 2009 as a representative of Sun 
Microsystems, and attended his first meeting in May of that year. He 
continued to represent Sun, and then Oracle from its aquisition of Sun,
until retiring in 2016. Robert subsequently rejoined the Fortran committee
in 2017, representing himself, and continued membership, including 
attending meetings, through the end of 2022.

Robert's contributions to the standard are too numerous to list, but he
was especially influential in the area of IEEE arithmetic, following the
efforts of ISO/IEC/IEEE 60559 and proposing changes to the Fortran
standard reflecting the developments of that committee. Robert was also
a meticulous reviewer of the standard as well as of proposal papers, 
leading to early detection of errors and ambiguities, thus improving the 
quality and consistency of the standard.

Please consider Robert Corbett for Emeritus Member status in the 
INCITS/Fortran Technical Committee.

Sincerely,

Reuben Budiardja
Chair, INCITS/Fortran Technical Committee






