To: J3                                                     J3/23-141
From: R. Bleikamp & JOR
Subject: Features JOR recommends for inclusion in F202y
Date: 2023-February-22

Reference: 23-124

JoR is recommending that the following list of features be included
in the list of features J3 submits to WG5 for possible inclusion in
Fortran 202Y. 

Paper 23-124 contains hyperlinks to descriptions of POSSIBLE versions
of each feature, but we are not choosing/voting on any particular
syntax or semantics, just the concept.

We may, at the Chair's discretion, straw vote each feature to establish
J3's position for that feature.  The straw votes would be YES to
include the feature in J3's list submitted to WG5, NO to exclude the
feature, and UNDECIDED.

If J3 chooses to "vote in" one of the features J3 did not recommend,
an r1 paper will be produced.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Features to be included in J3's list submitted to WG5

  fpp        - a preprocessor for Fortran, integrated in part1, like
               existing fpp's supplied by many vendors,
               somewhat Fortran friendly.

  f.p. model - add note to standard, that this model is not the model
               any particular HW uses, and for f.p., is not the same
               as IEEE 754.  JOR decided NOT to change the f.p. model
               currently in the standard.

  immutable  - something cleaner than nested ASSOCIATE blocks?
  values

  scan/      - see 23-113
  prefix sum

  IEEE math  - see 23-111r1
  intrinsics/operations

  SCAN clause for DO CONCURRENT REDUCE, deferred to HPC

  Deprecate  - deprecate only, not deletion
  D Edit Desc.

  source     - Method to retrieve the "current position" in a source 
  position     file as printable text or a value.  Might include
               current filename (if it exists), line #, possibly
               the current procedure name, ...
               May be provided by FPP and/or an intrinsic.

  tabs in    - Treat TAB as space in source input, 23-117. 
  source code
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 

The following features, either assigned to JoR or otherwise, are NOT 
recommended for inclusion in J3's list of features for F202y submitted
to WG5.  
  
Feature

  Remove processor dependencies from Annex A.
      JoR believes this is of little practical use, and too difficult
      for most of the dependencies in Annex A.
  
  ASSERTS
      JoR felt this feature is too vague, lacks a volunteer to drive
      this feature, and should be delayed until Generics support is
      fleshed out and has some actual use. 

  Disallow specific F202Y features when any deprecated/deleted feature
  is used in a program unit.
      JoR believes this is a bad idea.

  Fix surprising results for UBOUND/LBOUND for zero size arg.
      JoR believes the current functionality is ok.

  Intrinsic to return the calling procedures name, or a stack trace, ...
      JoR is sympathetic to other similar features, that do not cause
      calling convention changes or runtime overhead. 

  constexpr
      JoR is opposed to this feature.

  comments in list-directed I/O
      JoR chose not to propose this feature.

  EXCEL support in Fortran I/O
      JoR felt the library approach to providing support for reading
      or writing Excel files was appropriate.

  exception support in Fortran
      Not really assigned to JoR, and we don't feel we have the time
      and expertise to pursue this.  Other subgroups are welcome to 
      grab it of course.



