To: J3                                                     J3/23-200
From: Steve Lionel
Subject: Emeritus Member status for Rich Bleikamp
Date: 2023-June-14

1. Introduction

Following Rich Bleikamp's departure from J3, he is now eligible to be
considered for Emeritus Member status. INCITS describes this status as
follows in Section 3.8.3.4 ("Emeritus Members") of the INCITS Organization,
Policies and Procedures document:

"The Emeritus Member title recognizes individuals for their extensive
contribution to standards activities and enables INCITS to call on their
extensive history and talent for continuity following their retirement from
the ICT industry."

Emeritus Members hold non-voting memberships in J3. In order for Dan to
receive Emeritus Member status, J3 must resolve to recommend such status to
the INCITS Secretariat. A vote to approve this paper will be considered
resolution to make such a recommendation.


2. Letter of Recommendation to INCITS Secretariat

A letter with J3's recommendation for Emeritus Member status for Rich
is copied below, and will be submitted to the INCITS Secretariat if this
paper is passed.

----------

INCITS/Fortran Technical Committee

June 19, 2023

InterNational Committee for Information Technology Standards (INCITS)
Secretariat: Information Technology Industry Council (ITI)
1101 K Street NW, Suite 610, Washington, DC 20005

Dear INCITS Secretariat:

The INCITS/Fortran Technical Committee would like to recommend 
Richard Bleikamp for consideration as Emeritus Member.

Richard joined the Fortran committee in 1989 as a representative of
Convex/HP, authoring or co-authoring hundreds of papers for the
Control-I/O, Interpretations and JoR subgroups. (JoR (Journal of
Requirements) is tasked to organize, investigate, and vote on features 
for revisions of the Fortran standard.)

In 1993 Richard became head of the Control-I/O subgroup, and then in 1996, 
head of the Interpretations subgroup. Richard left the committee in 2007, 
rejoining it in 2019 as AMD's principal member, becoming head of the JoR 
subgroup. Richard continued in that role through his retirement from AMD 
in 2023, and was instrumental in designing features for the 2023 revision
of the Fortran standard.

Please consider Richard Bleikamp for Emeritus Member status in the 
INCITS/Fortran Technical Committee

Sincerely,

Reuben Budiardja
Chair, INCITS/Fortran






