To: J3                                                     J3/24-152r1
From: Lorri Menard
Subject: Emeritus Member status for Bill Long
Date: 2024-June-28

1. Introduction

Following Bill Long's retirement from HPE, and subsequently his position
as HPE representative for INCITS/Fortran (J3), he is now eligible to be
considered for Emeritus Member status. INCITS describes this status as
follows in Section 3.8.3.4 ("Emeritus Members") of the INCITS Organization,
Policies and Procedures document:

"The Emeritus Member title recognizes individuals for their extensive
contribution to standards activities and enables INCITS to call on their
extensive history and talent for continuity following their retirement from
the ICT industry."

Emeritus Members hold non-voting memberships in J3. In order for Bill to
receive Emeritus Member status, J3 must resolve to recommend such status to
the INCITS Secretariat. A vote to approve this paper will be considered
resolution to make such a recommendation.


2. Letter of Recommendation to INCITS Secretariat

A letter with J3's recommendation for Emeritus Member status for Bill
is copied below, and will be submitted to the INCITS Secretariat if this
paper is passed.

--------------------
INCITS/Fortran Technical Committee
June 28, 2024

InterNational Committee for Information Technology Standards (INCITS)
Secretariat:  Information Technology Industry Council (ITI)
700 K St NW, Suite 600   Washington, D.C. 20001, USA

Dear INCITS Secretariat and Executive Board:

The Fortran Technical Committee would like to recommend Bill Long for
consideration of an Emeritus Member.

Bill joined the committee in June 2001 as the representative for Cray Inc.
and later became the representative for Hewlett-Packard Enterprise (HPE)
until his retirement in June 2024. Bill has attended every meeting since
joining the committee, and his last Fortran meeting was also in June 2024.

During his tenure, Bill was the committee chairman for the High Performance
Computing (HPC) subcommittee, and was the editor of two Technical
Specifications ISO/IEC TS 18508:2015: "Additional Parallel Features in
Fortran" and ISO/IEC TS 29113:2012: "Further Interoperability of Fortran
with C" that later were adopted and incorporated into Fortran 2018. As a
senior member of the committee in good standing, Bill was also chosen to
stand in as substitute Chair when the then current chairman became
unavailable due to health issues.

Please consider Bill Long for Emeritus Member status in the INCITS/Fortran
Technical Committee.

Sincerely,
Reuben D. Budiardja
Chair, INCITS/Fortran
