To: J3                                                     J3/25-188r1
From: Malcolm Cohen
Subject: US25 complex/real association, specifications/syntax
Date: 2025-October-30
Reference: 24-129, 24-173


1. Introduction

Paper 24-129 suggests allowing real array pointers to complex targets,
and complex pointers to real array targets. Paper 24-173 has the formal
requirements for the feature.

This paper has specifications and syntax.


2. Additional technical issues

(d) Rank-remapping already has conditions that would make real pointers to
    complex targets work, but those conditions are insufficient for complex
    pointers to real targets when the target is a vector. In that case, the
    target must be contiguous, and maintaining the existing state which is
    that the suitability must be compile-time-detectable, that means that
    it must be simply contiguous.

(e) The standard at present only has the contiguity/rank rule for
    rank-remapping in plain normative text, not as a Constraint.
    It is arguably easier for users and vendors alike to have these simple
    rules listed as Constraints (less likely to be overlooked), and since
    we are revising it anyway, this paper will propose making the revised
    rule into a Constraint.

(f) Not a technical issue, but the requirements did not specifically state
    that a scalar pointer could be associated with an array
    (that is, a complex pointer and a two-element contiguous real array),
    nor that an array pointer could be associated with a scalar
    (that is, a real array pointer of size two and a scalar complex),
    the wording being deliberately vague.

    We can already have such associations via EQUIVALENCE, for single
    precision real and complex, so this would not be completely new; but
    in any case, the specifications need to say clearly if we intend to
    allow or disallow it.

    The primary use case for the feature is for the array association.
    Permitting scalar-array pointer association would reduce error
    detection by a small amount, would complicate the description and the
    standard, and would be inconsistent in that it would be the only case
    where a scalar could be associated with an array.
    Furthermore, there is little cost in making a scalar temporary, or a
    two element array temp, so permitting such an association would not be
    a significant benefit to the programmer.

    Thus, the proposal is that such associations shall be for arrays only.


3. Specifications (and syntax outline)

(25S-1) That an array pointer of type complex may be associated with a
        target array of type real, with the same kind.

(25S-2) That an array pointer of type real may be associated with a target
        that is an array of type complex, with the same kind.

(25S-3) Consecutive elements of the real array are associated with the real
        and imaginary parts, in order, of the complex array.

(25S-4) Such a pointer assignment shall only be done with a rank-remapping
        pointer assignment. That automatically requires the target to be
        either simply contiguous or of rank one.

(25S-5) When the pointer (on the LHS of the pointer assignment) is complex,
        the target shall be simply contiguous. This should be a Constraint.

(25S-6) Currently, the simply contiguous or rank one requirement is plain
        normative text. This should become a Constraint.

(25S-7) That no other association between real or complex is permitted,
        beyond that already provided by storage association. This is to
        maintain existing error detection capabilities. In particular,
        pointer assignment between an array and a scalar is not permitted.


4. Formal syntax

Formally, the syntax is described by edits to the standard that will
achieve it. Additional edits will be required. Also, the edits below could
benefit from more wordsmithing; however, as is they should be sufficient to
unambiguously describe the syntax and semantics.

Change
    "C1016 (R1034) If"
to
    "C1016 (R1034) If data-target is type real or complex, and either
           bounds-remapping-list or upper-bounds-expr appears, data-
           pointer-object shall be of type real or complex and the kind
           type parameters shall be equal.
           Otherwise, if"
Note: the rest of the constraint is:
                         "data-target is not unlimited polymorphic, data-
           pointer-object shall be type compatible (7.3.3) with it and the
           corresponding kind type parameters shall be equal."
{The first sentence covers real=>real and complex=>complex as well as this
 feature. This is simpler than having sentences that cover only the
 real=>complex and complex=>real cases.}

Before
   "C1022 If neither bounds-remapping-list nor upper-bounds-expr appears"
insert new constraint
   "C1021a If data-target is of type real and data-pointer-object is of
           type complex, data-target shall be simply contiguous (9.5.4).
           Otherwise, if bounds-remapping-list or upper-bounds-expr appears
           in a pointer-assignment-stmt, data-target shall be simply
           contiguous or of rank one."
{data-pointer-object only appears in pointer-assignment-stmt, so we don't
 need the condition in the first sentence.}

In paragraph 8, beginning "If bounds-remapping-list", delete
    "shall be simply contiguous (9.5.4) or of rank one, and"
{That part is now covered by the constraint.}

Still in p8, sentence
   "The number of elements of the pointer target shall not be less than
    the number implied by the bounds-remapping-list."
insert before the full stop:
   ", multiplied by two if the pointer object is of type complex and the
    target is of type real, or by half (and rounded up) if the pointer
    object is of type real and the target is of type complex".

Still in p8, sentence describing how the elements are associated, change
   "specified for the pointer object"
to
   "required by the bounds-remapping-list",
making that sentence read
   "The elements of the pointer object are associated with those of the
    pointer target, in array element order; if the pointer target has more
    elements than required by the bounds-remapping-list, the remaining
    elements are not associated with the pointer object."
{The "required by the bounds-remapping-list" is to get the multiplication
 by 0.5 or 2 included in the element count. The sentence is then correct,
 but it does not explain that with real/complex two elements on one side
 associated with one element on the other - we will do those next.}

Still in p8, append sentence
   "If the pointer object is of type real and the pointer target is of type
    complex, this association has two consecutive elements of the pointer
    object becoming associated with a single element of the pointer target,
    first the real part then the imaginary part; if the pointer object has
    an odd number of elements, the final element becomes associated with
    the real part of the final affected element of the pointer target."
{Semantics for real => complex.}

Still in p8, append another sentence
   "If the pointer object is of type complex and the pointer target is of
    type real, this association has each element of the pointer object
    becoming associated with two consecutive elements of the pointer
    target; the real part of the complex element becomes associated with
    the first of the consecutive real elements, and the imaginary part of
    the complex element becomes associated with the second of those
    consecutive elements."
{Semantics for complex => real.}

===END===
