To: J3                                                     J3/26-150r2
From: Brad Richardson & Generics
Subject: Response to UTI025
Date: 2026-June-17

Reference: 26-007r1

UTI 025 states:

    "Why is the that constraint needed?

    One immediately wonders if a nonintrinsic procedure can appear
    where it is not valid...

    Perhaps a NOTE is in order explaining this, because otherwise
    vendors might omit the checks it must be requiring.

    This seems like a very ad-hoc extra requirement on the
    instantiation argument, requiring analysis of the entire template
    not just the declarations.

    It contrasts strongly with the deferred types, where we have put
    onerous limitations on the instantiation argument just so that the
    compiler does not need to say something like "oh, you can't have
    this type here, because an object of this type was assigned to
    somewhere in the template"."

Subgroup agrees that constraint C1635 is not correctly stated. The
intent is to enable the use of intrinsic procedures as instantiation
arguments, but it is not well defined what specifics exist, or what
the interfaces of those specifics exactly are. It would also be
convenient if we could use the intrinsics as instantiation arguments
without needing the deferred procedure to specify the same optional
arguments. This would naturally extend to user procedures as well.
Based on discussions in subgroup, the following edits enable this.

[412:1-413:1] Replace the paragraph with the following.

    "The deferred procedure is treated as if it were a procedure with
     a single reference to its instantiation argument, providing as
     actual arguments to the instantiation argument the dummy
     arguments of the deferred procedure in order. If the deferred
     procedure is a function, the result of the reference is assigned
     to the result of the deferred procedure. If the instantiation
     argument is a generic-spec, this reference performs
     generic resolution. If the INTENT of a dummy argument of the
     deferred procedure is:
     * IN, the corresponding dummy argument of the instantiation
       argument shall be INTENT(IN),
     * INOUT, the corresponding dummy argument of the instantiation
       argument shall be INTENT(INOUT) or INTENT(OUT),
     * OUT, the corresponding dummy argument of the instantiation
       argument shall be INTENT(OUT),
     * unspecified, the corresponding dummy argument of the instantiation
       argument may have any INTENT."

[413:1+] Insert the following as a NOTE.

    "It is not necessary for an instantiation to actually include the
     deferred procedure as described above. The references
     to it within the template could be effectively replaced with
     references to the instantiation argument."

[413:2] Delete the constraint C1633.

[413:3-7] Replace constraint C1634 with "If the instantiation
          argument corresponding to a deferred procedure is a
          procedure name, it shall not be a procedure pointer."

[413:7+] Introduce a new constraint, "If the instantiation argument
         corresponding to a deferred procedure is a generic-spec, the
         procedure chosen by generic resolution shall not be a
         procedure pointer."

[413:7+] Introduce a new constraint, "If a deferred procedure is
         elemental, then its corresponding effective instantiation
         argument shall be elemental."

[413:7+] Introduce a new constratint, "An optional argument of a
         deferred procedure shall not correspond to a non-optional
         argument of its instantiation argument."

[413:8-10] Delete constraint C1635.

[413:10+] Insert the following as a NOTE.

          "The effect of the interpretation of deferred procedures and
           their corresponding instantiation arguments is such that:
           * trailing optional arguments of the instantiation
             argument can be ommitted from the interface of the
             deferred procedure,
           * a dummy argument of the instantiation argument that
             is assumed rank can correspond to an assumed-shape,
             assumed-size or scalar dummy argument of the deferred
             procedure,
           * an instantiation argument that is simple can correspond to a
             deferred procedure that is not simple, and
           * an instantiation argument that is pure can correspond to a
             deferred procedure that is not pure.

           The following is an example.

           TEMPLATE DEMO{T, REDUCTION}
               DEFERRED TYPE :: T
               DEFERRED INTERFACE
                   PURE FUNCTION REDUCTION(A)
                       TYPE(T), INTENT(IN) :: A(:)
                       TYPE(T) :: REDUCTION
                   END FUNCTION
               END INTERFACE
           CONTAINS
             SUBROUTINE DO_IT(A, B)
               TYPE(T), INTENT(IN) :: A(:)
               TYPE(T), INTENT(OUT) :: B
               B = REDUCTION(A)
             END SUBROUTINE
           END TEMPLATE

           INSTANTIATE DEMO{REAL, SUM}
           INSTANTIATE DEMO{INTEGER, PRODUCT}"

[413:10+] Delete UTI 025

--END--
