To: J3                                                     J3/26-144r3
From: Brad Richardson & Generics
Subject: Response to UTIs 018, 015 and 016
Date: 2026-June-18

Reference: 26-007r1

UTI 018 states:

    "Useless text left behind.

    I rewrote the above text because the paper was wrong, but in any
    case, I do not see anywhere it is useful."

UTI 015 states:

    "Omitted weird and ineffectual constraints.

    Ctt43b is moot because you cannot instantiate a TEMPLATE construct
    until after it has been defined. That is what "previously defined"
    means.

    Ctt43c is ineffectual because local names identify local entities.
    Those may be use-associated with entities in templates, but anyway,
    they cannot even exist until the template has been instantiated.

    Ctt43b A template construct shall be ultimately defined prior to
    any entity that depends on it.

    Ctt43c A name that appears in a template shall not identify any
    entity that depends on that template."

UTI 016 states:

    "Rules prohibit things already prohibited.

    TYPE(t) :: x

    is invalid unless TYPE t is previously defined. Which it is not.

    There may or may not be a hole somewhere here, but if so, this
    does not look like the way to fill it.

    An entity depends on an instantiation I if the entity's declaration
    or definition
    - contains the instantiation I
    - contains a name that identifies an entity from the instantiation I
    - contains a name that identifies an entity that depends on the
      instantiation I

    Ctt43d A name that appears as an instantiation argument shall not
    identify an entity that depends on that instantiation.

    NOTE 1

    The following is an example that is invalid due to Ctt43b.

    template tmpl()
        type :: U
            type(T) :: x
        end type
    end template

    instantiate tmpl()

    type :: T
        type(U) :: x
    end type"

-------

Subgroup concedes that the above constraints and examples could
certainly be improved. However, we do believe that they address
legitimate issues. Specifically, we don't think relying on
"previously defined" sufficiently prevents all bad cases.

In 20.5.1.4 Host association, "A derived-type definition, interface
body, internal subprogram, module subprogram, or submodule has access
to entities from its host as specified in 8.9. A host-associated
variable is considered to have been previously declared; any other
host-associated entity is considered to have been previously defined."
Subgroup is concerned that there are problematic examples.

In order to ensure that problematic examples are
explicitly invalid, the following edits should be applied.

[406:23-26] Delete the paragraph

[407:] Delete the entirety of UTIs 018, 015, and 016.

[407:] Insert new constraint C1624a, "Within a template, an entity
       accessed by host association shall not depend on any
       instantiation of the template."

[407:] Insert the following as a note.

    "The following is an example that is invalid due to C1624a.

     TEMPLATE TMPL{}
       TYPE :: U
         TYPE(T) :: X
       END TYPE
     END TEMPLATE
     INSTANTIATE TMPL{}
     TYPE :: T
       TYPE(U) :: X
     END TYPE"

[407:] Insert new constraint C1624b after the previous paragraph,
       "An instantiation argument shall not depend on that
       instantiation."

[407:] Insert the following as a note.

    "The following is an example that is invalid due to C1624b.
     S1 has an argument of type T, which is created by the
     instantiation, thus S1 depends on the instantiation, and
     thus the instantiate statement violates the constraint.

    MODULE A
        TEMPLATE TMPL{S}
            TYPE :: T
            END TYPE
            DEFERRED INTERFACE
                SUBROUTINE S(X)
                    TYPE(T) :: X
                END INTERFACE
            END INTERFACE
        END TEMPLATE

        INSTANTIATE TMPL{S1}
    CONTAINS
        SUBROUTINE S1(X)
            TYPE(T) :: X
        END SUBROUTINE
    END MODULE"

[643:24] before "submodule" delete "or " and after "submodule" insert
         ", or template" such that the sentence now reads "A
         derived-type definition, interface body, internal subprogram,
         module subprogram, submodule, or template has access to entities from
         its host as specified in 8.9."

--END--
