To: J3                                                     J3/26-168
From: Van Snyder
Subject: Comments on 25-159r2 (asynchronous regions, US-04)
Date: 2026-June-11
References: 97-114r2 00-317 06-197 25-159r2

Work item US-04 has been postponed.

I have a few thoughts on the rationale/discussion paper 25-159r2.

It was realized decades ago that semaphores, critical sections, or
monitor procedures are essential. It is surprising that they are
explicitly excluded, or at least explicitly postponed, by NR1.

Underscores are not needed in statements. For exaple, we replaced
SYNC_ALL with SYNC ALL. Fortran parsers can handle more than one word,
or words separated by spaces or punctuation other than underscore.

R5 says that asynchronous regions shall not contain image control
statements or references to collective subroutines. This is only a
lexical requirement, that can be violated without compile-time detection
by procedure references unless some other mechanism is added, something
like "asynchronous purity" or "coarray purity" or "collective purity."

R6 says dependency chains shall span different lexical scopes. That
seems like the same problem as R5.

The WAIT statement for asynchronous I/O would work instead of
ASYNC_WAIT, so another differently-spelt statement is not needed. But
that proposal was already rejected in other contexts, for example
waiting for an event. But having a differentll-spelt one for each
philosophically identical purpose perpetuates what was identified before
1980 as "Fortran's beloved tacked-on look."

R7 requires a mechanism to describe locality of data. The BLOCK
construct does this, or allowing constructs in addition to the BLOCK
construct to have a <specification-part> does this.  But that
proposition was rejected when it was proposed in connection to DO
CONCURRENT.LOCAL_INIT could have been provided by the long-requested
facility for local [scalar] automatic variables that get initial values
upon scope activation, without that specification adding the SAVE
attribute. That a block is asynchronous, and has a <specification-part>,
would be obvious if asynchronous regions were specified by

[<label:>] BLOCK [, ASYNCHRONOUS [ <dependencies> ] ]

rather than by a differently-spelt statement. Or if the
differently-spent construct had a <specification-part>. Asynchronous
regions were proposed in 97-114r2.

An adjunct to asynchronous regions is a FORK-JOIN construct. Bill Long
pointed out that this can be done in a perceptually opaque way by
enclosing a SELECT CASE construct in a DO CONCURRENT construct. Since it
can already be done, syntactic sugar would be helpful. This construct
was proposed in 97-114r2, 00-317, and 06-197.

Ada users and developers realized several decades ago that their task
model intrinsically required overheads, so they invented "protected
objects," which are essentially coroutines. Alan Burns and Andy
Wellings describe this in "Concurrent and Real-Time Programming in Ada"
(July 2007). Have we learned anything from them?
