							X3J3/94-003
To:		X3J3
From:		Rich Kelble
Subject:	X3J3 Member References




This is an attempt to consolidate various pieces of information that 
have been written down to guide new and current members of our 
committee.  It was initially based on the following two documents:

Documents Relevant to New Members by Maureen Hoffert.

Suggestions for X3J3 Meeting Hosts by Maureen Hoffert and last 
updated by Hank Lauson.


X3J3 Documents


Relevant Standards:  Available from ANSI (see address below) or 
available at ftp server
	- Fortran 90, line numbered
	- FORTRAN 77 (version minus subset useful for meetings)

Internal X3J3 email (electronic mailing lists)
	x3j3@ncsa.uiuc.edu
	x3j3-oof@ncsa.uiuc.edu  (object-oriented Fortran)
	x3j3-parallel@ncsa.uiuc.edu  (parallel processing features)

To add to the X3J3 mailing lists or other administrative work:
	x3j3-request@ncsa.uiuc.edu
	f90interp-request@ncsa.uiuc.edu

WG5 Email list:
	SC22WG5@dkuug.dk
	(Note: The X3J3 mailing list is on the WG5 list, so please do not 
	send to both.)

Internal X3J3 Documents: available at the ftp server
	To access (using ftp):
		ftp ftp.ncsa.uiuc.edu
		login: anonymous
		       ^^^^^^^^^   -> what you type
		passwd: <your email address, eg. mbsh@fc.hp.com>
		                                 ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
		cd x3j3  <gets you to x3j3 directory>
		^^^^^^^
		ls    <lists files in the directory>
		^^
		get .index  <gets index of files in directory>
		^^^^^^^^^^
		get <filename of document>  <gets document
		                             specified on command
		                             line
	To access (using email):
		The files on the ftp server may also be retrieved using 
		email.  To do so, send a message to the address
		archive-server@ncsa.uiuc.edu.  The body of the message
		contains one archive server command per line.  Some of the
		more important commands are:
			- help  (sends instructions on the use of the archive 
			         server)
			- index [archive...] (sends list of files in the 	
						    specified archive, e.g., 		
						    index x3j3)
			- send <archive> <file...>  (mails you the requested 	
							     files)


	Feb. 1994, available by ftp are:
		minutes (122, 124, 125, 126)
		ascii version of Fortran 77
		public call for proposed Fortran requirements form
		X3J3/93-004 - Journal of Requirements
		X3J3/93-005 - X3J3 Responses and Resolutions
		X3J3/94-006r0 - Interpretation Documents
		X3J3/93-007r1 - Fortran 9x working draft (ascii, frame, 	
				    postscript)
		S8.104 Appendix F (old Journal of Development)
		X3H5/93-SD2 (Parallel Extensions for Fortran)
	Hopefully in the future X3J3 Premeeting, and postmeeting 
	distributions will also be available

On Minutes:
	In addition to the record of the meeting the minutes also contain:
		membership list
		attendance record
		schedule of meetings
		distribution assignments
		subgroup organization
		officers
		liaisons

Internal WG5 Documents: available at the ftp server
	To access:
		- follow the instructions above for the X3J3 documents
		- use the directory sc22wg5 for the wg5 documents
	Feb. 1994, available by ftp are:
		N930 (resolutions of the Berchtesgaden meeting)
		N938 (Guidelines for Bindings to Fortran 90)
		corrigendum
		is1539-2 (Varying String Module)

X3 Documents of Possible Interest:
	- X3 SDs 0 through 10 (available by calling ANSI: 1-202-626-5739)
	- ANSI Procedures for the Development and Coordination of American
	  National Standards
	- ANSI Procedures for US Participation in the International 
	  Standards Activities
	   of the ISO
	- Other documents are referenced in Appendix B of X3/SD-8 that
	  might be of interest.



All ANSI Documents can be attained from the following address:
	X3 Secretariat
	Computer and Business Equipment Manufacturers
	Association (CBEMA)
	1250 Eye Street NW
	Suite 200
	Washington, D.C. 20005

	Tel.:  202 737 8888 (press 1 twice)
	FAX:   202 638 4922 or 202 628 2829

All ISO/IEC documents can be attained from the following address:
	International Electrotechnical Commission
	3, rue de Varembe
	Case postale 131
	CH-1211 Geneva 20

	tel: nat.   022 734 01 50
	     int.   41 22 734 01 50


		Suggestions for X3J3 Meeting Hosts


I.	Task Checklist and Suggested Schedules
	A.	Accommodations
		1.	Room arrangements for meeting rooms and members' hotel 
			rooms
			Hotel Rooms:
			-	arrange for hotel to provide a block of rooms for 
				members to stay for 30 - 35 people based on past 
				meetings.  (This could change over time).
			-	arrange for discount with hotel if possible for 
				members' room rates; arrange for both single and double 
				room rates
			Meeting Rooms:
			-	meeting room should be able to seat about 30 people, 
				currently, at an oblong table with enough room for 
				papers. (30" deep, 36"/person?)
			-	meeting room should have extra tables upon which to 
				place document distributions (30" deep, 18' long?)
			-	meeting room should have overhead projector and screen 
				for transparencies (foils) and slide projector if 
				required
			-	arrange for break-out rooms for subgroup meetings (if 
				too expensive we often use the meeting room itself, the 
				FIDS room and members' hotel rooms)
			-	arrange for a FIDS room (for informal get-together 
				before dinner and where computer(s), printer(s), and 
				copier(s) can be set up)
			-	Determine meeting expenses to be charged to X3J3 
				members.  X3J3 just voted to raise this fee to $100 
				(US); in the past it was $80.00
		2.	Reservation information
			-	Notify membership on deadlines, information and method 
				for making reservations
	B.	Meeting Arrangements
		1.	Notices
			-	Send all information for Meeting Notice Distribution to 
				Chair and Vice-Chair no later than 8 weeks before a 
				meeting:

				Meeting Title
				Meeting Place (Complete address, phone and fax)
				Hotel (Complete address, phone and fax)
				Meeting Fee ($100.00)
				Host Name (Complete address, phone, email address and 
				fax)

				NOTE:  X3 Rules requires that a meeting notice MUST be 
				distributed 4 weeks before a meeting!

			-	Make sure any registration deadlines are well 
				publicized to the membership
			-	Send to the membership any travel information to both 
				hotel and to meeting location; include time involved 
				for travel and include any parking information if 
				necessary
			-	Send all meeting information to email list; official 
				notifications will be sent with meeting notice and 
				agenda
			-	Announce arrangements at earlier X3J3 meetings so 
				members can begin to plan
			-	Arrange for local entertainment or tour for one evening 
				or afternoon
			-	At least 1 month before the meeting provide weather and 
				other special arrangement information to email list
		2.	Arrange for copying/duplication services to be available 
			during the meeting (~2 months before the meeting)
			-	Arrange for computer and printer for members to use 
				during the meeting (~2 months before the meeting)
			-	See more about copying under "Useful Hints" below
		3.	Arrange for food during the meeting:
			-	Morning Continental Breakfast
			-	Morning Break
			-	Afternoon Break
			(About 6 - 12 months before the meeting, depending on 
			local demand for hotels.  Be sure to negotiate all 
			prices ahead of time.)
		4.	Activities required during the meeting
			-	Work with Treasurer for bill payment arrangements
			-	Help with computer access, requirements
			-	Supervise copying of documents
			-	Provide liaison with hotel during meeting week
II.	Useful Hints
	A.	What To Do If Hotel Insists On Prepayment - Suggestions:
		-	host company provides prepayment
		-	get another hotel
		-	see if X3J3 Treasurer can cover temporarily
	B.	Criteria for Hotel Selection
		-	comfortable
		-	easily accessible from major airport
		-	usually there is no cost for the meeting room
		-	reasonably priced for area of meeting
		-	availability of group discount rates
		-	availability of corporate discount rates
		-	usual price for hotel rooms is around $60 - $90
		-	hotel within walking distance of restaurants and possibly 
			shopping districts
	C.	Number Of Hotel Rooms Required In The Past Have Been:
			Terre Haute (121): 33
			Bellevue    (122): 27
			New Haven   (123): 27
		These numbers might be useful in estimating the size of the 
		meeting room needed.
	D.	Negotiations With A Hotel
		-	Be careful to understand what all hidden costs will be.  
			(One time there was a $1.50 charge per tea bag since it was 
			not included in the original contract with the hotel.)
		-	Make sure all options are explored.  Each hotel has 
			different packages and options.  For example, the meeting 
			room might be free if there is $70 a person of food arranged 
			for at the meetings; the meeting room might be free if the 
			hotel caters at least one meal; or the meeting room is free 
			if more than 10 rooms are booked, etc.
		-	Make sure what the hotel's deadline is to free up unreserved 
			rooms in the block of rooms; make sure members know of this 
			deadline
		-	Make sure what the hotel's policy is on charging for rooms 
			reserved in the block; we do not want to pay for unused 
			rooms
		-	Possibly arrange with hotel transportation to and from the 
			airport for those members not renting a car
		-	Contact hotels as early as possible in order to make the 
			best possible arrangements in terms of price and hotel.  The 
			best hotels are booked the earliest.
		-	Try to inspect facilities yourself on the first day of the 
			meeting rather than rely on hotel staff.  You know what the 
			committee is used to for accommodations.
	E.	More On The Hotel Arrangements:
		-	The meeting room is nicer if it has windows
		-	Room should be reasonably free of outside noise such as from 
			the kitchen or street
		-	It is nice if the room is available on a 24 hour basis
		-	It is nice if the room has easy access to the outside for 
			breaks
		-	Table space is very important and we often do not have 
			enough room on the table for all of our working documents
		-	Having drapes on the tables is nice.  Hotels often do this 
			but you might remind them
	F.	It is better if you can visit the hotels before negotiating 
		the contract in order to evaluate for yourself the suitability 
		of the accommodations
	G.	Costs for meetings are covered by the meeting fees collected 
		at the meeting from the membership.  Sometimes people are 
		excused from paying this fee due to hardship or lack of 
		funding, so meeting costs should be calculated on the basis of 
		a conservative estimate of attendance.  Currently there are 
		approximately 27 people attending who are paying.  X3J3 voted 
		to increase the meeting fee to $100 at meeting 122 (Bellevue, 
		1992) but we hope not to use all of that for some meetings at 
		least.
		-	Costs include:
			. food
			. meeting room
			. FIDS room
			. break-out rooms
			. copying
			. miscellaneous (do not know what this is but something 
			  might come up)
	H.	On Copying Services:
		-	Factors to consider in providing copy services:  cost and 
			timely turn-around.  The number of documents produced at a 
			meeting vary from 60 - 200 with 20 - 30 copies per document.  
			Often the committee needs to be able to have copies returned 
			in just a couple of hours.  Three copy runs a day can be 
			needed.
		-	Having efficient and inexpensive copying is very important 
			to the success of the meeting.
		-	Copy services that have been successful in the past are:
			.	have someone available to do copy runs to business or 
				local copying shop
			.	use of local copying business at prearranged prices 
				hired out
			.	rental of copy machine by host for the week with enough 
				paper available for members to do their own copying as 
				needed
			.	The hotel's copying service is usually quite expensive 
				and is not a good option, but check about this with the 
				hotel.
			-	Copy runs are normally made first thing in the morning; 
				shortly after lunch; and one before dinner so papers can be 
				read overnight.  Check with committee each day on their 
				requirements.
III.	Optional Tasks
	A.	Provide weather information for that time of year; it helps to 
		know what to wear and bring
	B.	Provide Restaurant Lists And Potential Entertainment 
		Opportunities
		-	include average price and directions and type of restaurant.  
			(Local Chambers of Commerce often have this information 
			available)
		-	in the past we have had interesting site/plant tours of a 
			host's facility, for example of SLAC.  We have also had 
			hikes in Estes Park and at Lake Tahoe as well.  We have had 
			lovely dinners at hosts homes.
	C.	Suggestions For Continental Breakfasts:
		-	Fruit and fruit juice
		-	Coffee and hot water (with tea bags)
		-	Miscellaneous baked goods -	muffins, pastries, etc.
	D.	Suggestions To Include With Snacks:
		-	Fruit, muffins, cookies, pastries, doughnuts, etc.
		-	Coffee, tea, hot water, fruit juice in morning
		-	Coffee, tea, hot water, soda in afternoon
	E.	Make sure to check meeting schedule to see if snacks will be 
		needed on last day of meeting
	F.	Drinking water should be on table throughout meeting
	G.	Have someone from the hotel or meeting place readily available 
		if there are meeting needs that need to be met quickly.  
		(Situations that have needed attention in the past have been a 
		leaky roof, an overheated meeting room, and a malfunctioning 
		projector.)
	I.	Some people might stay over another night at the hotel or 
		arrive a day or so earlier.  Make sure that some rooms are 
		available (about 1/4) and that the reduced rate applies to the 
		extra days if possible.  Check with membership that the 
		arrangements meet their expectations.
IV.	Miscellaneous Materials Useful To Have Available
	A.	Pencils, pens, markers, erasers
	B.	Tape; scotch and masking
	C.	Hole punch (preferably two punches)
	D.	Stapler and stapler remover
	E.	Paper; plain and lined
	F.	Waste basket (large!)
	G.	Blank transparencies and markers
	H.	White-out
	I.	Power strips and extension cords for members' computers in 
		meeting room
