                                                      X3J3 / 96-141R1

Date:        Aug 14, 1996
To:          X3J3
From:        Data
Subject:     Specs for R.5, PDTs

This paper summarizes the specifications for parameterized
derived types, item R.5 on the F2k requirements list of
X3J3/96-115r4.  These specifications are based on those in the
WG5 D28 paper labelled "Option 2 + Component Selection", which
appears as part of X3J3/96-125 as a starting point.  The current
paper summarizes those specifications and makes some further
refinements and modifications.  The rationale and discussions are
mostly omitted from this summary in order to keep it short; they
are well presented in paper D28.

1. Type-definition statement

  An optional list of type parameter names may be added in parens
  following the type-name in a type-definition statement.

  Example:
    type matrix(kind, dim)

2. Type parameter typing

  All type parameters are of type integer.  This may be confirmed
  by an explicit INTEGER declaration in the derived type
  definition.  An explicit declaration can also be used to
  declare a type parameter to be of an integer kind other than
  default integer.

  Examples:

    type matrix(kind, dim)
      !-- kind and dim are implicitly default integer
      real(kind) :: element(dim, dim)
    end type

    type humogous_matrix(kind, dim)
      integer :: kind  !-- Confirms kind as default integer
      integer(selected_int_kind(12)) :: dim
           !--  Specify a non-default kind for dim
      real(kind) :: element(dim, dim)
    end type

3. Kind vs non-kind parameters

  Type parameters are either kind type parameters on non-kind
  type parameters.  Kind type parameters participate in overload
  resolution and may appear in initialization expressions
  (particularly, in kind expressions for components) and in
  specification expressions.  Non-kind type parameters do not
  participate in overload resolution and may not appear in
  initialization expressions; they may appear in specification
  expressions.  A kind type parameter is said to have the KIND
  attribute.

  A type parameter may be declared to have the KIND attribute by
  using a KIND attribute on the INTEGER declaration of the
  parameter.  It may also be declared to not have the KIND
  attribute by using a NO_KIND attribute.  If a type parameter
  does not explicitly or implicitly (see below) have the KIND
  attribute, then it has the NO_KIND attribute by default;
  it is never required to explicitly specify the NO_KIND
  attribute, but it is allowed as a confirmation.

  Example:

    type stuff(kind, dim)
      integer, kind :: kind
      integer, no_kind :: dim
      real(kind) :: element(dim, dim)
      real(kind+1) :: scratch(2*dim)
        !-- kind is used as a primary in initialization exprs.
        !-- dim is used as a primary in specification exprs.
    end type

4. Implicit kind declaration

  With the exception mentioned below, appearance of a type
  parameter in an initialization expression implicitly declares
  it to have the kind attribute.  This implicit declaration may
  be confirmed by an explicit declaration.  It is an error for a
  type parameter to appear in an initialization expression if the
  type parameter was declared with the NO_KIND attribute.

  Example:

    type matrix(kind, dim)
      real(kind) :: element(dim, dim)
    end type
    !-- kind is implicitly a kind type parameter because
    !-- it appears in an initialization expr.
    !-- dim is implicitly no_kind.

  If a derived type MY_TYPE has a component COMP that is a
  pointer to a (possibly different) derived type, the appearance
  of a type parameter of MY_TYPE in the expressions for the kind
  type parameter values of COMP implicitly declares it to be a
  kind type parameter of MY_TYPE only if the type definition for
  COMP precedes that of MY_TYPE.  For example

      type type_1(a)
        integer, kind :: a  !-- required because we don't yet know
                            !-- whether type_2 has a kind type parameter.
        type(type_2(a)), pointer :: comp
      end type

      type type_2(b)
        !-- No explicit declaration of b needed here.
        type(type_1(b)), pointer :: comp
      end type

  Note that this is never at issue except with pointer
  components.

5. Object declaration.

  The syntax for declaring an object of parameterized derived
  type closely follows that of intrinsic parameterized types.
  The type parameter values are specified in parens after the
  type name, in either keyword or positional form.  There are no
  optional type parameters for derived types, so there is no
  concept of a default type-parameter value.

  The expression for a kind type parameter shall be an integer
  initialization expression.  The expression for a non-kind type
  parameter may be either a specification expression or assumed.
  The expressions for type parameter values need not be of the
  same integer kind as the type parameter.

  Examples:
    type(matrix(4,1000)) :: a
    type(matrix(kind=4,dim=1000) :: b

    subroutine sub(c, d, n)
      integer :: n
      type(matrix(kind=8, dim=*)) :: c
      type(matrix(kind=8, dim=2*n)) :: d

6. Constructors

  Steve's paper proposed to redefine all derived type
  constructors (not just those for parameterized derived types)
  to be generic functions.  This raises several subtle points
  that are largely orthogonal to the introduction of
  parameterized derived types.  Those points do not appear to be
  addressed in Steve's proposal.

  Therefore, data proposes to separate these issues.  A
  subsequent proposal might make this modification, but for now
  this proposal is less ambitious.

  A constructor for a parameterized derived type has the same
  form as the constructor for the existing derived types, with
  the addition of the type parameters at the end of the list.

  The form of all derived type constructors is also enhanced to
  allow a keyword form syntactically identical to that of a
  function call.  However, we avoid for now the extra
  complications of actually defining these constructors to be
  functions.

  Examples:

    type stock_item  !-- Note this is *not* a pdt.
      integer :: id, holding, buy_level
      character(len=20) :: desc
      real :: buy_price, sell_price
    end type
    type(stock_item) :: &
         s = stock_item(12345,75,10,"pencils", 1.5, 2.4)
    ...
    s = stock_item(desc="pencils", id=12345, &
                   holding=75, sell_price=2.4, &
                   buy_level=10, buy_price=1.5)

    type node(key_len)  !-- This one is a pdt
      character(key_len) :: desc
      type(node(keylen)), pointer :: next
    end type
    type (node(16)) :: word
    ...
    word = node("ralph", null(), key_len=16)

7. Type parameter inquiry

  Component selection syntax is used to inquire about type
  parameter values.  An inquiry about a kind type parameter can
  appear as a primary in an initialization expression; an inquiry
  about a non-kind type parameter can appear as a primary in an
  initialization expression if the actual value inquired about
  was defined as a constant expression.  an inquiry about any
  type parameter can appear as a primary in a specification
  expression.

  This directly follows the existing rules for how the existing
  intrinsic inquiry functions can be used.

  Examples:
     word%key_len  !-- word declared as above.

  The component selection syntax is also extended to the
  intrinsic types.

  Examples:
    real(4) :: a
    character*20 :: c
    write (*,*) a%kind, c%len  !-- i.e. 4 and 20

8. Intrinsic assignment

  Intrinsic assigment for parameterized derived types is defined
  only when the variable and expression have the same type and type
  parameter values


9. Argument association and overload rules

  The argument association rules follow those for objects of
  intrinsic types.  The actual and dummy arguments must agree in
  type and type parameters.  For non-kind parameters, the dummy
  argument may assume the value from the actual argument.
  Kind-type parameters may not be assumed.  Kind type parameters
  may be used to resolve generic overloads.

  Examples:

      type(matrix(kind=4, dim=100)) :: a
      call sub(a)
      ...
    subroutine sub(b)
      type(matrix(kind=4, dim=*)) :: b  !-- dim is assumed.

    module matrix_manipulation

      type matrix(kind, dim)
        real(kind) :: element(dim, dim)
      end type

      interface invert_in_place
        module procedure invert_single, invert_double
      end interface

    contains

      subroutine invert_single(a)
        type(matrix(kind=4, dim=*)), intent(inout) :: a
        ...
      end subroutine invert_single

      subroutine invert_double(a)
        type(matrix(kind=8, dim=*)), intent(inout) :: a
        ...
      end subroutine invert_double

    end module matrix_manipulation

10. Visibility and scoping

  The type parameter names are useable as keywords in object
  declarations even when the derived type has private components.
  Likewise, the parameter values can be inquired about even when
  the components of the derived type are private.

  Thus the type parameter names have more visibility than the
  component names.  This is consistent with the usage with
  intrinsic types.  This is not the rule proposed in Steve's
  paper.

  Also Steve's paper mentioned renames for type parameters.
  No such facility exists or is proposed; this mention was
  presumably a holdover from the inquiry function approach.

11. Sequence

  Parameterized derived types may have the SEQUENCE property.
  A parameterized derived type is never considered a numeric
  or character sequence type even if all of its ultimate
  components are numeric or character.

  Sequence parameterized derived types may appear in common
  and equivalence provided that all of the type parameter
  values are constants.  This follows the existing rules for
  character.
