     May 15 16:34 1996  X3J3/96-109R1 Page 1


                                                       X3J3/96-109R1
     
     To: X3J3, WG5, and Steve Morgan
     From: Richard Maine
     Subject: Liaison Report on Parameterized Derived Types
     
     At X3J3 meeting 137, Steve Morgan made a presentation on
     the proposed TR on parameterized derived types.  Substantial
     discussion ensued on the technical concerns that had been
     previously raised by X3J3 in paper X3J3/95-0288R1.
     
     There appears to be general agreement on the approach to
     handling several of the concerns.  In some cases X3J3
     appeared satisfied that an issue was adequately answered;
     the question of "*" versus ":" for dummy nonkind parameters
     was one such issue.  In other cases, Steve Morgan agreed
     with the concern and with an approach to addressing it;
     the lack of edits in section 4 to define the syntax of
     appropriate constructors was one such issue.
     
     A general agreement does not yet appear to have developed
     on the question of whether inquiries are best handled by
     a syntax like an inquiry function or by a syntax like
     component selection.  The current proposal uses an inquiry
     function syntax.  There was substantial sentiment for
     a syntax like component selection.
     
     Several other areas were also the subject of debate, but
     most of these seem to tie closely to the issue of whether
     or not derived type parameters look somewhat like components.
     For example, the question of namespace "pollution" and
     the effects of rename become moot if a component selection
     syntax is used instead of an inquiry function syntax.
     Similarly, the syntax for component definition allows
     no possibility of implicit typing, so if the type parameter
     specification uses similar syntax, the question of
     implicit typing also becomes moot.  However, using a
     component selection syntax would be potentially confusing in
     that such "components" could be referenced, but never
     set.
     
     The main conclusion drawn from this discussion was that
     further work was needed to reach sufficient consensus on the
     best technical approach.  Steve Morgan felt that there was
     still sufficient time to produce an alternative TR (taking
     into account the discussions at the meeting) for presentation
     at the WG5 meeting in Dresden.

