

                                                         X3J3/96-145r1
                                                         Page 1 of 2

          Date:       1996/08/14
          To:         X3J3
          From:       /io
          Subject:    Dresden Resolution D6 (Interoperability)
          References: X3J3/96-123

          With Dresden Resolution D6, WG5 decided to merge the
          existing HPFF proposal for Interoperability (the "MAP_TO"
          proposal) with the existing WG5 draft TR on Interoperability
          (the "BIND" proposal).

          On the surface, this might be seen as providing a best-of-
          both-worlds solution.  The user who doesn't want to have to
          worry about C data types in their Fortran program, can have
          the C data types specified in one place - the interface
          body.  The user who wants to ensure that no copying of data
          occurs on procedure calls can use the ISO_C module to
          declare objects using kind-type parameters that correspond
          to those used in their C procedures.

          Unfortunately, there are cases that the MAP_TO approach
          fails to handle, and there are certain surprises that come
          with the MAP_TO approach:

          (1) WG5 has indicated that it would like the TR to handle
              C extern data.  However, it is not possible for the
              MAP_TO approach to be used in that situation; on a
              reference to a procedure defined by C, there is no way
              of mapping from Fortran data types to the C data types
              for extern data.  The kind type parameters of the ISO_C
              module will have to be used for variables of this sort.

          (2) WG5 has indicated that it disliked the idea of recursive
              MAP_TO specification of dummy arguments of derived type.
              The only other reasonable way of handling the problem is
              to permit MAP_TO to be specified with the derived type
              definition instead, or have the user use the kind type
              parameters defined in the ISO_C module.  This
              contradicts the principle that the MAP_TO attribute only
              needs to be specified in interface bodies.

          (3) Several members of X3J3 have indicated that when users
              discover that a copy-in/copy-out mechanism is being used
              to pass arrays in some situations in most
              implementations, they rewrite their code to avoid those
              situations.  The MAP_TO proposal actually requires
              copy-in/copy-out of dummy arguments in those situations
              in which the representation of the actual argument in
              the Fortran processor does not match the representation
              of the dummy argument used by the C processor.







                                                         X3J3/96-145r1
                                                         Page 2 of 2

              Users will be forced to either use the kind type
              parameters of the ISO_C module from the start, or resort
              to using them when they encounter an implementation for
              which the representations differ for Fortran and C.

          (4) The copy-in/copy-out approach also has other potentially
              surprising consequences.  For example,

                 INTERFACE
                   BIND(C, 'SUB') SUBROUTINE SUB(A)
                     REAL(KIND(0.0D0)), MAP_TO('double') :: A
                   END SUBROUTINE SUB
                 END INTERFACE

                 X = 1.0D0 + 1.0D-16
                 PRINT *, X
                 CALL SUB(X)
                 PRINT *, X
                 END

              may have the effect that two different values of X are
              displayed before and after the call to SUB, if the
              representation of double precision values is different
              from those of double values.

              It is not clear what would happen if A had been given
              INTENT(IN).

          (5) Finally, as has been pointed out before, copy-in/
              copy-out causes special problems for Asynchronous I/O
              and other forms of parallelism.  Requiring the
              semantics of copy-in/copy-out just introduces more
              headaches for implementations when these features are
              integrated.

          For these reasons, we would like to recommend that WG5
          reconsider its decision to integrate the MAP_TO and
          BIND_TO approaches, and focus on the original BIND_TO
          approach.
