
                                                           X3J3/96-162

Date:     October 25, 1996
To:       X3J3
From:     David Epstein
Subject:  N1192r1 based on ballot comments

Below is a revision of N1192 based on the comments collected
during the recent SC22WG5 informal ballot.

David

------------------------
CONDITIONAL COMPILATION IN FORTRAN

ISO/IEC 1539-3 : 1996

{Auxiliary to ISO/IEC 1539 : 1996 "Programming Language Fortran"}


CONTENTS

 1. Introduction

 2. Rationale

 3. General
      1. Scope
      2. Normative References

 4. The Conditional Compilation Language Definition

 Annex CCA : Examples

1. INTRODUCTION ----------------------------------------------------

This part of ISO/IEC 1539 has been prepared by ISO/IEC JTC1/SC22/WG5,
the technical working group for the Fortran language.  This part of
ISO/IEC 1539 is an auxiliary standard to ISO/IEC 1539 : 1996, which
defines the latest revision of the Fortran language, and is the first
part of the multipart Fortran family of standards; this part of
ISO/IEC 1539 is the third part.  The revised language defined by the
above standard is informally known as Fortran 95.

This part of ISO/IEC 1539 defines a conditional compilation language
facility.

2. RATIONALE -------------------------------------------------------

Programmers often maintain multiple copies of code for various
operating systems.  Maintaining more than one copy of code or
relying on edits to the source are error prone methods of obtaining
conditional compilation.  A conditional compilation language facility
permits the programmer to rely on the processor to select blocks of
code based on specified conditions.

There are many uses for conditional compilation.  Writing portable
code is one of the most popular uses of conditional compilation.
Examples in Annex A show some other uses for conditional compilation.

3. GENERAL ---------------------------------------------------------

      1. Scope

This part of ISO/IEC 1539 defines facilities for use in Fortran for
conditional compilation.  This part of ISO/IEC 1539 provides an
auxiliary standard for the version of the Fortran language informally
known as Fortran 95.  The international Standard defining this revision
of the Fortran language is

ISO/IEC 1539-1 : 1996 "Programming Language Fortran"
 
      2. Normative References

The following standard contains provisions which, through reference in
this text, constitute provisions of this part of IOS/IEC 1539.  At the
time of publication, the edition indicated was valid.  All standards
are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this part
of IOS/IEC 1539 are encouraged to investigate the possibility of
applying the most recent editions of the standard indicated below.
Members of IEC and ISO maintain registers of currently valid
International Standards.

IOS/IEC 1539-1 : 1996, Information technology--Programming
Languages--Fortran.

4. THE CONDITIONAL COMPILATION LANGUAGE DEFINITION -----------------

   Section CC1  Conditional Compilation

The conditional compilation language definition for Fortran consists of
nine directives and one option.  The one option together with the
conditional compilation directives offer the power to select alternative
blocks of code for compilation without modifying the source text.

In this part of ISO/IEC 1539, sections are numbered CCs, where s
is a one or two-digit section number.  The notation used in this
part of ISO/IEC 1539 is described in Part 1, section 1.6.  However,
item (4) in Part 1, section 1.6.2 is replace with:

    (4)  Each syntax rule is given a unique identifying number of the
         form CCRsnn, where s is a one or two-digit section number and
         nn is a two-digit sequence number within that section. The
         syntax rules are distributed as appropriate throughout the
         text, and are referenced by number as needed.  Some rules in
         Section CC2 and CC3 are more fully described in later sections;
         in such cases, the section number s is the number of the later
         section where the rule is repeated.

   Section CC2  High level syntax

This section introduces the terms associated with the conditional
compilation program.

  CCR201    coco-program     is    coco-directive
                                   [ coco-directive ] ...

  CCR202    coco-directive   is    coco-type-decl-directive
                             or    coco-executable-construct
                             or    INCLUDE line

  CCR203    coco-executable-construct    is     coco-action-directive
                                         or      coco-if-construct

  CCR204    coco-action-directive         is coco-assignment-directive
                                          or  coco-error-directive

   Section CC3  Constants, source form and including text

        CC3.1  Coco constants

  CCR301    coco-constant            is  coco-literal-constant
                                     or  coco-named-constant

  CCR302    coco-literal-constant    is   coco-int-literal-constant
                                     or  coco-logical-literal-constant

  CCR303    coco-int-literal-constant        is      digit-string
  CCR304    coco-logical-literal-constant    is      .TRUE.
                                             or      .FALSE. 

  CCR305    coco-char-literal-constant       is      ' [ rep-char ] ...  '
                                             or      " [ rep-char ] ...  "

  CCR306    coco-named-constant      is   name

[digit-string is specified in part 1, R402 of this standard.]
[rep-char is specified in part 1, section 4.3.2.1 of this standard.]
[A name is specified in part 1, section 3.2.1 of this standard.]

        CC3.2  Coco source form

A coco program is a sequence of one or more lines, organized as coco 
directives and coco comments.  A coco directive is a sequence of one
or more complete or partial lines.  A line is a sequence of zero or
more characters.

A coco character context means characters within a coco character
literal constant (CCR305).

A coco comment may contain any character that may occur in any
coco character context.

In coco source form, each source line may contain from zero to
132 characters and there are restrictions on where a coco
directive (or portion of a coco directive) may appear within a line.

In coco source form, blank characters shall not appear within coco
lexical tokens other than in a coco character context.  Blanks
may be inserted freely between coco tokens to improve readability. A
sequence of blank characters outside of a coco character context is
equivalent to a single blank character.

[Lexical token is specified in part 1, section 3.2 of this standard.]

A blank shall be used to separate coco names, or coco constants from
adjacent keywords, coco names, or coco constants.

        CC3.2.1  Coco directive start

  CCR307    coco-dir-start      is      ??

Constraint:  The characters "??" shall be in
character positions 1 and 2 of the source line.

        CC3.2.2  Coco commentary

A line that does not start with a coco-dir-start and is not an
INCLUDE line is called a coco comment line.  Within a coco directive,
the character "!" in any character position initiates a coco comment
except when it appears within a coco character context.  The comment
extends to the end of the source line.  If the first nonblank character
on a line after a coco-dir-start is an "!", the line is also a coco
comment line.  Lines containing only blanks after a coco-dir-start
or containing no characters after a coco-dir-start are also
coco comment lines.

 Note CC3.1
 Examples of coco comment lines are:

 gender = GetRabbitGender(a_rabbit)
 ! a Fortran comment
 ?? ! set "system" to "system_A"
 ??
 ?>       OPEN(UNIT=6, FILE="system.dependent.name")
 ?*     OPEN(UNIT=6, FILE="sysdpnt.nam")
 ENDNote CC3.1

        CC3.2.3  Coco directive continuation

The character "&" is used to indicate that the current coco directive
is continued on the next line.  The next line shall begin with a
coco-dir-start.  Coco comment lines shall not be continued; an "&" in
a coco comment has no effect.  When used for continuation, the "&" is
not part of the coco directive.  No line shall contain a single "&" as
the only nonblank character after a coco-dir-start in a coco directive
or as the only nonblank character after the coco-dir-start and before
an "!" that initiates a comment.

        CC3.2.3.1  Coco-noncharacter context continuation

In a coco directive, if an "&" not in a coco comment is the last
nonblank character on a line or the last nonblank character before
an "!" that initiates a comment, the coco directive is continued on
the next line.  If the first nonblank character after a coco-dir-start
on the next coco-noncomment line is an "&", the coco directive continues
at the next character following the "&"; otherwise, it continues with
the first character position after the coco-dir-start of the next
coco-noncomment line.

If a coco lexical token is split across the end of a line, the first
nonblank character after the coco-dir-start on the first following
coco-noncomment line shall be an "&" immediately followed by the
successive characters of the split token. 

 Note CC3.2
 An example of coco-noncharacter context continuation is:

 ?? LOGICAL :: TOO_GOOD&
 ??&_TO_BE_&
 ??&TRUE =           &
 ??           .FALSE.  ! These four lines contain 1 coco directive
 ENDNote CC3.2

        CC3.2.3.2  Coco character context continuation

If a coco character context is to be continued, the "&" shall be the
last nonblank character on the line and shall not be followed by coco
commentary.  An "&" shall be the first nonblank character after
the coco-dir-start on the next line and the coco directive continues
with the next character following the "&". 

 Note CC3.3
 An example of coco character context continuation is:

 ?? ERROR "de&
 ??          &f&
 ??           &inately choosing Fortran" ! 3 lines, 1 coco directive
 ENDNote CC3.3

        CC3.2.4  Coco directives

A coco directive shall begin with a coco-dir-start.  If a coco directive
has one or more continuation lines, every line from the start of the
coco directive until the end of the coco directive shall begin with a
coco-dir-start.

A coco directive shall not have more than 39 continuation lines.

 Note CC3.4
 Examples of coco directives are:

 ?? INTEGER, PARAMETER :: SYSTEM_A = 1
 ?? ERROR "system_A = ", SYSTEM_A
 ??   IF (.FALSE.) THEN
 ??   ENDIF
 ENDNote CC3.4

        CC3.3  Including source text  

Additional text may be incorporated into the source text of a
coco program during processing.  This is accomplished with the
INCLUDE line, which has the form

	INCLUDE char-literal-constant  

[The INCLUDE line is specified in part 1, section 3.4 of this standard.]

Included source text cannot directly or indirectly include itself.

An INCLUDE line in a coco FALSE block (CC6.2.2) is not expanded. Any
coco-else-if-directive, coco-else-directive and coco-endif-directive
shall not appear in included source text unless the matching
coco-if-directive appears in the same included source text.

   Section CC4  Coco type declaration directives

Every data object has a type and may have the parameter attribute. The
type of a named data object is specified in a type declaration directive.

  CCR401    coco-type-declaration-directive   is      

  coco-type-spec [ , PARAMETER ] :: coco-entity-decl-list 

  CCR402    coco-type-spec       is      INTEGER
                                 or      LOGICAL

  CCR403    coco-entity-decl     is

   coco-object-name [ coco-initialization ]

Constraint:  A coco-object-name shall not be the same as any
other coco-object-name.

  CCR404    coco-object-name     is      object-name

[Object-name token is specified in part 1, section 5 of this
standard.]

Constraint:  coco-object-name shall appear in a
coco-type-declaration-directive before appearing elsewhere in a coco
program.

  CCR405    coco-initialization  is      = coco-initialization-expr

Constraint: The types of the coco-initialization-expr and the
coco-type-spec shall either both be integer or both be logical.

Constraint: In a coco-type-declaration-directive, if the PARAMETER
attribute is specified, a coco-initialization shall appear for
every coco-object-name.

 Note CC4.1
 Examples of coco type declaration directives are:

 ?? INTEGER, PARAMETER :: F77 = 1, F90 = 2, F95 = 3
 ?? INTEGER :: FORTRAN_LEVEL = F95
 ?? LOGICAL :: DEBUG_PROCEDURE_ENTRY_EXIT
 ENDNote CC4.1

   Section CC5  Coco variables, expressions and assignment directive

        CC5.1   Coco variables

  CCR501    coco-variable        is      coco-variable-name

Constraint:  coco-variable-name shall not have the
PARAMETER attribute.

        CC5.2  Coco expressions

        CC5.2.1  Coco primary

  CCR502    coco-primary  is      coco-constant
                          or      coco-variable
                          or      ( coco-expr )

Constraint:  A coco-variable shall be defined (CC8.2) before
appearing as a coco-primary.

        CC5.2.2  Level-1 expressions

  CCR503    coco-add-operand     is

   [ coco-add-operand mult-op ] coco-primary

[mult-op is specified in part 1, section 7.1.1.3 of this standard.]

  CCR504    coco-level-1-expr    is

   [ [ coco-level-1-expr ] add-op ] coco-add-operand
[add-op is specified in part 1, section 7.1.1.3 of this standard.]

        CC5.2.3  Level-2 expressions

  CCR505    coco-level-2-expr    is

   [ coco-level-1-expr rel-op ] coco-level-1-expr

[rel-op is specified in part 1, section 7.1.1.5 of this standard.]

        CC5.2.4  Level-3 expressions

  CCR506    coco-and-operand     is

   [ not-op ] coco-level-2-expr

[not-op is specified in part 1, section 7.1.1.6 of this standard.]

  CCR507    coco-or-operand      is

   [ coco-or-operand and-op ] coco-and-operand

[and-op is specified in part 1, section 7.1.1.6 of this standard.]

  CCR508    coco-equiv-operand   is

   [ coco-equiv-operand or-op ] coco-or-operand

[or-op is specified in part 1, section 7.1.1.6 of this standard.]

  CCR509    coco-level-3-expr    is

   [ coco-level-3-expr equiv-op ] coco-equiv-operand

[equiv-op is specified in part 1, section 7.1.1.6 of this standard.]

        CC5.2.5  General form of a coco expression

  CCR510    coco-expr    is      coco-level-3-expr

        CC5.3  Data type of a coco expression

The data type of a coco expression is either Integer or Logical.

[The data type of a coco expression is specified in part 1, table
7.1 of this standard.]

  CCR511    coco-logical-expr    is     coco-expr

Constraint:  coco-logical-expr shall be type logical.

        CC5.4  Coco initialization expression

  CCR512    coco-initialization-expr     is      coco-expr

Constraint:  A coco-initialization-expr shall not have a coco-variable
as a coco-primary.

        CC5.5  Coco assignment directive

A coco variable may be defined or redefined by execution of
a coco assignment directive.

  CCR513    coco-assignment-directive is

   coco-variable = coco-expr

where coco-variable is defined in CCR501 and coco-expr is
defined in CCR510.

In a coco assignment directive, the types of coco-variable
and coco-expr shall either both be integer or both be logical.

 Note CC5.2
 Examples of coco assignment directives are:

 ?? DEBUG_LEVEL = DEBUG_LEVEL ÿ2D 1
 ?? IS_COMPANY_X_MACHINE = (SYSTEM == SYS_E) .OR. (SYSTEM == SYS_F)
 ??    PROJECT_LEVEL = FOO_VERSION ÿ2D LATEST_RELEASE
 ENDNote CC5.2

   Section CC6  Coco execution control and conditional compilation

The execution sequence and conditional compilation are
controlled by coco if constructs.

 Note CC6.1
 A coco program is not required to contain any coco if constructs,
 coco error directives or INCLUDE lines.  Execution of such a coco
 program has no effect.
 ENDNote CC6.1

        CC6.1  Coco blocks

A coco block is a sequence of coco directives that are treated
as a unit.

  CCR601    coco-block   is      [ coco-directive ] ...

Coco executable constructs may be used to control which coco blocks
of a coco program are executed.  

        CC6.2  Coco IF construct

The coco IF construct selects for execution no more than one of its
constituent coco blocks.  This coco block is called the coco TRUE
block.  The remainder of the coco blocks in a coco IF construct, if
any, are selected to be ignored by the processor.  These coco blocks
are called coco FALSE blocks.

        CC6.2.1  Form of the coco IF construct

  CCR602    coco-if-construct    is      coco-if-then-directive

                                            coco-block

                                     [ coco-else-if-directive

                                            coco-block ] ...

                                     [ coco-else-directive

                                            coco-block ]

                                     coco-end-if-directive

  CCR603    coco-if-then-directive    is    

   IF ( coco-logical-expr ) THEN

  CCR604    coco-else-if-directive    is    

   ELSE IF ( coco-logical-expr ) THEN 

  CCR605    coco-else-directive       is    ELSE 

  CCR606    coco-end-if-directive     is    END IF

 Note CC6.2
 An example of two coco if constructs, one nested within the
 other, is:

 ?? IF (IS_COMPANY_X_MACHINE) THEN 
 ??  IF (FORTRAN_LEVEL == F95) THEN
         PURE FUNCTION GET_RABBIT_WEIGHT(A_RABBIT) RESULT(WEIGHT)
          TYPE (RABBIT), INTENT(IN) :: A_RABBIT
 ??  ELSEIF (FORTRAN_LEVEL == F90) THEN
         FUNCTION GET_RABBIT_WEIGHT(A_RABBIT) RESULT(WEIGHT)
          TYPE (RABBIT) :: A_RABBIT
 ??  ELSE
 ??   ERROR "We do not have a FORTRAN 77 product from company X"
 ??  ENDIF
 ?? ELSE
         FUNCTION GET_RABBIT_WEIGHT() RESULT(WEIGHT)
	  ! Only have Fortran 90 derived types with company X, so
	  ! return a weight of 1 for now
 ?? ENDIF
 ENDNote CC6.2

        CC6.2.2  Execution of an IF construct

At most one of the coco blocks in the coco IF construct is executed.
If there is a coco ELSE directive in the construct, exactly one of
the coco blocks in the construct will be executed.  The coco 
logical expressions are evaluated in the order of their appearance
in the construct until a true value is found or a coco ELSE directive
or coco END IF directive is encountered.  If a true value or a coco
ELSE directive is found, the coco block immediately following is
executed and this completes the execution of the construct.  The
coco logical expressions in any remaining coco ELSE IF
directives of the coco IF construct are not evaluated.  If none of
the evaluated expressions are true and there is no coco ELSE directive,
the execution of the construct is completed without the execution of
any coco block within the construct.

Execution of a coco END IF directive has no effect. 

        CC6.2.2.1  Execution of a coco TRUE block

Source lines contained in a coco TRUE block are selected as lines
for noncoco processing.

 Note CC6.3
 Although noncoco processing generally refers to Fortran processing,
 it is not required that the lines contained in a coco TRUE block
 are valid Fortran source text. 
 ENDNote CC6.3

        CC6.2.2.2  Execution of a coco FALSE block

Source lines contained in a coco FALSE block are selected as
lines to be ignored by noncoco processing.

 Note CC6.4
 If a processor offers an output file as a result of coco processing,
 possible options on the handling of coco directive lines and
 lines in a coco FALSE block are:
  (1) delete them,
  (2) replace them with blank lines,
  (3) replace them with a "!" in character position 1 followed by the
      original source line shifted one to the right, or
  (4) replace them with a "!" in character position 1 followed by the
      the characters starting from character position 2 of the original
      source line.
 All other lines could be copied without modification into the output
 file.
 ENDNote CC6.4

   Section CC7  Coco error directive and coco stop directive

  CCR701    coco-error-directive   is

   ERROR [ coco-output-item-list ]

  CCR702    coco-output-item     is      coco-expr
                                 or      coco-char-literal-constant

Execution of a coco ERROR directive specifies that an error has occurred
during coco processing.  At the time of execution of a coco ERROR
directive, the output-item-list, if any, is available in a
processor-dependent manner.

 Note CC7.1
 Examples of the coco error directive are:

 ?? ERROR "system shall be set to 'sys1' or 'sys2'"
 ?? ERROR "system = ", SYSTEM
 ?? ERROR
 ENDNote CC7.1

  CCR703    coco-stop-directive   is     STOP

Execution of a coco STOP directive halts coco processing.

   Section CC8  Scope and definition of coco variables

        CC8.1  Scope of coco variables

Coco variables have the scope of the coco program in which they
are declared.

        CC8.2  Events that cause coco variables to become defined

Coco variables become defined as follows:

(1)     Execution of a coco assignment directive causes the coco
variable that precedes the equals to become defined.

(2)     Execution of a coco initialization in a coco type
declaration directive causes the coco variable that precedes
the equals to become defined.

(3)     Execution of the coco-set-option (Section CC10) causes
the coco variable to become defined.

   Section CC9  Coco program conformance
A coco program is a standard-conforming coco program if it uses only
those forms and relationships herein and if the program has an
interpretation according to this standard.

A coco processor conforms to this standard if:

   (1)  It executes any standard-conforming coco program in a manner
        that fulfills the interpretations herein, subject to any limits
        that the processor may impose on the size and complexity of
        the coco program.

   (2)  It contains the capability to detect and report the use within
        a submitted coco program of an additional form or relationship
        that is not permitted by the numbered syntax rules or their
        associated constraints.

   (3)  It contains the capability to detect and report the use within
        a submitted coco program of source form not permitted by
        Section CC3.

   (4)  It contains the capability to detect and report the reason for
        rejecting a submitted program.

   Section CC10  The coco SET option

There is one coco option--the coco-set-option.  A processor shall
supply at least one method of recognizing the coco-set-option separate
from the coco program.

 Note CC10.1 
 The invocation line may be the chosen method of communicating the
 coco-set-option to the processor.  Another method of communicating
 the coco-set-option to the processor could be a coco input file.
 ENDNote CC10.1

The coco-set-option is a method of
 (1) documenting the value of a coco PARAMETER;
 (2) assigning an initial value to a coco variable (CCR501);
 (3) overriding the initial value assigned to a coco variable in
     a coco initialization expression (CCR512)
without editing the coco program.

 Note CC10.2
 Recall that a coco variable shall not have the PARAMETER attribute.
 ENDNote CC10.2
  CCR1001   coco-set-option     is

   coco-set-option-variable=coco-set-option-literal-constant
   [ coco-set-option-variable=coco-set-option-literal-constant ] ...

                              or

   processor-defined-coco-set-option

  CCR1002   coco-set-option-variable   is  coco-variable

  CCR1003   coco-set-option-literal-constant is coco-literal-constant

Constraint:  A processor-defined-coco-set-option shall contain a
coco-set-option-variable and a coco-set-option-literal-constant.

Constraint:  The coco-set-option-variable must be a coco variable
declared in the coco type declaration directive.

Constraint:  The type of the coco-set-option-variable
shall match the type of the coco-set-option-literal-constant.

Constraint:  If the coco-set-option-variable has the PARAMETER
attribute, the value of the coco-set-option-literal-constant
shall match the value supplied in the coco type declaration directive.

Constaint:  If the coco-set-option-variable appears in the coco
program as the coco variable in a coco assignment directive, it
shall appear at least once in a previous coco executable construct.

The coco-set-option minimally consists of a coco-set-option-variable
and a coco-set-option-literal-constant.  A processor may supply
additional representations for the coco logical literal constant;
for example, the characters 'T' or 'F' could be used to represent
.TRUE. or .FALSE. respectively.  In this case it is as if .TRUE.
or .FALSE. were specified as the coco-set-option-literal-constant.

The coco-set-option acts as if a coco assignment directive (CCR513)--
which consists of the coco-set-option-variable as the coco variable
and the coco-set-option-literal-constant as the coco expression
(CCR510)--were placed immediately following the coco type declaration
directive that declared the coco-set-option-variable.

 Note CC10.4
 The value assigned to a coco variable with the coco-set-option shall
 not override the value assigned to a coco variable with the coco
 assignment directive.
 ENDNote CC10.4

Annex CCA : EXAMPLES -------------------------------------------------

This annex includes two examples illustrating the use of facilities
conformant with this part of ISO/IEC 1539.

The first example uses conditional compilation to facilitate the
editing of a large block comment.

The second example uses conditional compilation to provide
debugging information upon entering and exiting procedures.
Note, the conditional compilation directives in this example
could be automatically generated.

Each example contains a conditional compilation program and a possible
output file from conditional compilation processing.

--- initial text ------------------------------------------
! EXAMPLE 1 shows a possible shift file for output
?? LOGICAL :: MODIFYING_HEADER_COMMENT = .FALSE.
?? IF (.NOT. MODIFYING_HEADER_COMMENT) THEN

One convenient use of conditional compilation is the
ability to write large comments that span across many
lines without requiring each line to start with a "!".
Since conditional compilation specifies blocks of lines
to be skipped over by the processor, this whole paragraph
can be written and modified without the overhead of
making sure that each line is a Fortran comment.

One can imagine this use of conditional compilation for
header comments preceding Fortran programs, modules and
procedures.

??  ENDIF

--- possible text output from conditional compilation processing ---
! EXAMPLE 1 shows a possible shift file for output
!?>?? LOGICAL :: MODIFYING_HEADER_COMMENT = .FALSE.
!?>??  IF (.NOT. MODIFYING_HEADER_COMMENT) THEN
!?>
!?>One convenient use of conditional compilation is the
!?>ability to write large comments that span across many
!?>lines without requiring each line to start with a "!".
!?>Since conditional compilation specifies blocks of lines
!?>to be skipped over by the processor, this whole paragraph
!?>can be written and modified without the overhead of
!?>making sure that each line is a Fortran comment.
!?>
!?>One can imagine this use of conditional compilation for
!?>header comments preceding Fortran programs, modules and
!?>procedures.
!?>
!?>??  ENDIF

--- initial text ------------------------------------------
! EXAMPLE 2 shows a possible short file for output
?? LOGICAL :: DEBUG_PROC_NAME = .FALSE.
?? LOGICAL :: DEBUG_PROC_ARGS = .FALSE.
?? ! Make sure to debug the procedure name if debugging the arguments
?? DEBUG_PROC_NAME = DEBUG_PROC_NAME .OR. DEBUG_PROC_ARGS
SUBROUTINE INTSWAP (LEFT, RIGHT)
  INTEGER, INTENT(INOUT) :: LEFT, RIGHT
  INTEGER :: WRONG
?? IF (DEBUG_PROC_NAME) THEN
   PRINT *, "Entering IntSwap"
?? ENDIF
?? IF (DEBUG_PROC_ARGS) THEN
   PRINT *, " IntSwap(in):left = ", LEFT
   PRINT *, " IntSwap(in):right = ", RIGHT
?? ENDIF

   WRONG = RIGHT
   LEFT = RIGHT
   RIGHT = WRONG

?? IF (DEBUG_PROC_ARGS) THEN
   PRINT *, " IntSwap(out):left = ", LEFT
   PRINT *, " IntSwap(out):right = ", RIGHT
?? ENDIF
?? IF (DEBUG_PROC_NAME) THEN
   PRINT *, "Exiting IntSwap"
?? ENDIF
ENDSUBROUTINE INTSWAP

--- possible text output from conditional compilation processing ---
! EXAMPLE 2 shows a possible short file for output
SUBROUTINE INTSWAP (LEFT, RIGHT)
  INTEGER, INTENT(INOUT) :: LEFT, RIGHT
  INTEGER :: WRONG

   WRONG = RIGHT
   LEFT = RIGHT
   RIGHT = WRONG

ENDSUBROUTINE INTSWAP
