                                                    X3J3/97-137r1

Date:    February 13, 1997
To:      WG5/X3J3
From:    Craig Dedo
Subject: Fortran-like CoCo Scribe Notes


     Following are scribe notes from the technical portion of the discussion on the Fortran-like
Conditional Compilation (CoCo) facility.  This discussion was held in the Courtyard Room at the
Sunrise Suites Hotel, 4575 Boulder Highway, Las Vegas, NV from 8:00 p.m. until 9:35 p.m. on
Wednesday, February 12, 1997.

References:    X3J3 / 97-111, Part 3, Conditional Compilation

Michael Hennecke Would it be acceptable for a Fortran-like CoCo to have macro expansion?

Richard Bleikamp A Fortran-like CoCo needs to have a simplistic, portable macro expansion
                 capability, at least one tenth as powerful as what is in cpp.

Kurt Hirchert  We need to have CoCo interpolate values into output lines.  The Fortran-like CoCo has a very powerful computational capability but we can't use it
               in anything.  We need to plug computed values into generated source code
               and it is desirable to flag the lines of the input code where the interpolated
               values are used.

Walt Brainerd  CoCo should have the capability to get information off of the command line
               and out of environmental variables. It does not have CHARACTER
               variables right now.  It should have CHARACTER variables.

John Cuthbertson Macro expansion is like statement functions.  I find it strange that we want
                 to include a feature which is equivalent to a feature which is obsolescent.

Keith Bierman  Formerly, the straw votes indicated that we did not want macro expansion.
               A while back, we went through some code from ISVs which were significant
               commercial applications.  We found out that almost all of this code was
               based on the full capabilities of the cpp macro facility.

Craig Dedo     I would like the Fortran-like CoCo to have the Fortran PRINT and STOP
               statements instead of the current ERROR statement.

Wolfgang Walter  Why did David use an ERROR statement instead of the Fortran PRINT and
                 STOP statements?

Craig Dedo     David wanted the absolute minimalist approach.

Question       What does a macro expansion or interpolation capability give you that
               symbolic constants do not?

Kurt Hirchert  This capability allows you to change the names of procedures in the source
               code.

Tony Warnock   I want the absolute minimum tool that is necessary to get the job done.  We
               can always expand it later.  We should put stuff into this version of CoCo
               knowing that it is going to be added to.  We should make it a really simple
               facility that can get the job done.

Michael Hennecke I would use many different macro expansion capabilities beyond the simple
                 INTEGER and LOGICAL variables which are supported right now.  This
                 should not be simple text replacement.  Many complex codes use arbitrary
                 text.

Kurt Hirchert  We considered a proposed requirement on TYPE aliasing.  A CoCo
               interpolation or macro expansion capability could be used to achieve TYPE
               aliasing in a different way.

Reva Sacks     While I like full macro expansion, judging by the help desk inquiries, our
               customers are not using full macro expansion very much.  From looking at
               Larry Rolison's paper, I am impressed by how hard full macro expansion is.
               I am very worried about the time delay in getting CoCo out if we include
               full macro expansion.

Straw Vote  Do we want macro expansion at all in a Fortran-like CoCo?
  10 Yes       4 No      7 Undecided

Straw Vote  Assuming a Fortran-like CoCo has some level of macro expansion capability, what
            level of macro expansion do you want?
  1  Full
  9  Limited
  8  Minimal
  5  Undecided

Tony Warnock   There are lots of reasons to want a CHARACTER data type.  Right now, I
               have a program which reads a parameter file and writes into a file.  If I had
               a CHARACTER data type in a pre-processor, I could have the pre-processor
               read the parameter file and insert the CHARACTER data directly into the
               source file.  There are reasons why this is useful.  For example, there are
               different  names for system calls on a PC than on a Sun.  On different
               systems, I use different names for scratch files.

Michael Hennecke With the way that CoCo is defined right now, we need to document the
                 meaning of INTEGER variables in comments.  When a processor has
                 trouble with a variable, the programmer has trouble detecting its meaning.
                 The current examples of the use of INTEGER variables are very clumsy.  I
                 do not want to have to use numbers to identify the different machines that
                 I am compiling for.

Walt Brainerd  You could use various LOGICAL variables to specify the target platforms.

Michael Hennecke I am troubled by the definition of the scope of the CoCo variables.  Right
                 now, the CoCo document defines the scope to be the program.  This
                 contrasts with cpp defining the scope to be the source file.  The current
                 CoCo definition could have some serious undesirable interactions.

Straw Vote:    Do you want a CHARACTER data type in a Fortran-like CoCo facility?
  15 Yes       1 No      7 Undecided
