
                                                             J3/97-180

Date:       May 14, 1997
To:         J3
From:       Interval 1
Subject:    Directions for interval optionality
References:

Subgroup has identified the following general possibilities for
handling a program containing interval syntax on a processor that
does not support interval arithmetic.

   1. ("Fortran IEEE style") The program must compile, but there is a
      runtime test (such as an intrinsic function) that returns
      whether the processor supports interval arithmetic.

      Pro: (a) Compiles everywhere;

           (b) easy for consumer

      Con: (a) Greater implementation burden.

           (b) Potentially confusing (The vendor does not provide
               a warning, error committal and notification therefore
               are too separated.)

   2. Handling is processor-dependent. (The processor may or may not
      give a diagnostic;  what the processor actually does with
      the interval syntax is not specified; indeed whether compilation
      succeeds is left unspecified.)

      Pro: Easy to write the standard.

      Con: (a) Hard on users, since difficult to write portable
               code (requires technology outside 1539-1, such as
               COCO to write portable code).

           (b) Standard-conforming programs may or may not
               compile on a standard-conforming processor.

   3. The processor must diagnose non-support at compilation time
      (constraint-like).

      Pro: Users cannot be surprised at runtime. (Oversimplification:
           Users can't get a wrong answer.)

      Con: (a) There is no single source-code portability.

           (b) It may not be possible to check interval syntax on a
               machine that does not support interval arithmetic.

Discussion:

Subgroup uniformly recommends (3). We may need some input on
whether it should truly be a constraint, or merely be a required
failure (if there is a difference in implementation effort). Our
reasoning is essentially as follows:

(1) is a burden for both users and implementers. The "nightmare"
scenario is a processor that chooses to treat intervals as
reals (interval constants as the midpoint, etc.) *and* a buggy
user program that fails to check at runtime. The result *appears*
"ok" but isn't really an interval result (so containment isn't
required, etc.).  While one would hope that such a vendor would
have produced a diagnostic warning, and no user would ever fail
to write the appropriate check, life is often imperfect.

(2) maximizes the burden on consumers. Potentially mistakes
might not be diagnosed (return of the nightmare).

(3) provides maximum protection for users, and provides
"failure" information earliest (when it's easiest to cope with
from a human factors perspective). It is subgroup's hope that
this is not seen as an unreasonable implementation burden.
