To: J3								J3/97-262
From: JOR/Bleikamp
Subject: Further ASYNC I/O edits
Date: Nov. 12,1997

These edits include:
  - Fixes for problems described in 97-235.
  - Fixes for issues raised in a "J3 internal note" in 97-007r1.
  - Additional editorial changes not included in 97-255.

Edits are not included for edits defered from 97-216r2 (blocks of edits in
216r2 marked as "no longer part of the edits")

Major functional changes:
  - we decided to only allow the async attribute to be specified on
    a whole object (base object name), and not on a component declaration
    in a derived type definition.
  - restricted when errors on outstanding requests can occur, to
    improve the ability to handle expected errors/conditions, like EOF
    on input.

Section 9.5 [157:37], spell "Sucessful" correctly, unless the alternative
edit for this sentence is adopted (this later edit is prefered by JOR)..
Another problem in this sentence may be the definition of "successful
execution of a data transfer statement".  It could be interpreted as
meaning the processor did not malfunction, or that any errors were
successfully handled by an IOSTAT= or ERR= or END= specifier.

Edit: Section 9.5 [157:37] Change "Successful execution of an asynchronous
      data transfer statement"
  to
      "Execution of an asynchronous data transfer statement in which
       neither an error condition nor an end-of-record nor an end-of-file
       condition occurs".


  -- Richard Maine wrote -- issue 1
  Do we really want to allow async as a component attribute spec?
  I sent out an email on this question, but haven't heard a single
  comment in reply.  Added a J3Note in 4.4.1.

  Answer: No.  JOR (after 2+ hours of discussion) decided to only allow
          the async attribtute to be specified on an object.  An individual
          component or element cannot be given the async attribute, either
          in the ASYNCHRONOUS statement, or in a derived type definition.
	  When a variable is an affector, its leftmost part shall have
	  the ASYNC attribute.
	  JOR also decided to address the issue of implicit acquisition
	  of the ASYNC attribute (due to I/O lists) to mean the leftmost
          part of a part-ref, or the whole array, to be the object which
          implicitly acquires the async attribute.

Edits:
  Section 4.4.1 [38:43], delete "or ASYNCHRONOUS" from R426, and the
  subsequent J3 internal note.

  Section 9.4.1.10 [150:31-36],
  change "Any variable" to "When a variable"
  change "is implicitly"
    to
  "the <object-name> (when the variable is an <object-name>), or the
  leftmost <part-name> in the <data-ref> when the variable is a <dataref>,
  is implicitly"

  Note to Richard M.  I considered using the "base object" term [77:8],
  but is wasn't clear this covered the array element case.  If it does,
  you can use "base object of" instead of "leftmost <part-name> in".

  Section 5.1.2.12 [58:36-37] , replace this text with:

    "When a variable is a pending I/O storage sequence affector, the
     <object-name> (when the variable is an <object-name>), or the
     leftmost <part-name> in the <data-ref> (when the variable is a
     <data-ref>), shall have the ASYNCHRONOUS attribute in a scoping
     unit if"

  and in [58:38] replace "(1) they appear"
    by
  "(1) that variable appears"


  and in [59:3], change "A variable with"
    to
  "If a variable whose <object-name> or leftmost <part-name> has the"

  Note 5.17, change "ine the" to "in the".

  Note to Richard M, the same note about "base object" applies to these edits
  also.

  -- Richard Maine wrote -- issue 2
  In 5.1.2.12, the requirements for the async attribute seem a
  little broad.  Item 2 says "while an [i.e. *ANY*] asynchronous
  data transfer operation is pending."  Can't we safely narrow this
  requirement to only apply while the particular data transfer
  operations are pending?  We could still allow other pending data
  transfers that this variable has nothing to do with.  I've
  done nothing on this.

  Answer: no, i don't think we can relax this.  The point was that any
          variable which is an affector is ONLY an affector while an
	  asynchronous data transfer operation which references the
	  same storage units is pending.  Once that data transfer is
	  waited upon, the variable is not necessarily an affector.

  -- Richard Maine wrote -- issue 3
  Exactly what variables get the async attribute implicitly?  The
  text is not clear on the point and I was unable to fix it up because
  I was unsure of the intent.  recall that subobjects of variables
  are also variables.  Example:
     read(...,asyncronous='yes') a(7), b%c%d, e(i)
  Is just a(7) implicitly async, or all of "a"?  Simillarly, just b%c%d
  or all of b?  How about if b%c is a pointer?  Is "i" implicitly
  async (it does "appear in the i/i list).  I need guidance on the
  technical intent here before I can craft words.  I put the words
  pretty much from 97-216r2 in, but they aren't really adequate to
  specify the exact meaning.  Also, does the implicitly conferred
  async attribute apply only to the current scoping unit or possibly
  also to the host (if this is in an internal or module procedure)
  and/or "child" (internal procedure) scoping units.  Added a J3Note
  in 9.4.1.10.

  Answer: if a(44) is the list item, "a" gets the async attribute.
          if b%c is the list item, "b" gets the async attribute.

Edits were provided above.


  -- Richard Maine wrote -- issue 4
  While on the subject of the async attribute, its scoping and
  inheritance rules are never explicitly stated....and the intent
  isn't clear to me in all cases.  It is clearly intended that a
  variable can have the async attribute in some scoping units, but
  not in others.  But the details of how this works are never
  specified.  If a module variable is specified as async in the
  module, does the attribute also apply in scoping units using
  the module?  How about host association - is a variable that is
  async in the host also async in the internal or module procedures
  contained in the host?  And does an async statement in a contained
  scope "hide" any variable of that name from the host or just apply
  the async attribute to the variable from the host?  These questions
  all need to be answered.  (Makes me wonder whether we wouldn't be
  better off just making async follow the same rules as the other
  attributes in that a variable either has it or not and it doesn't
  change from one scoping unit to another - I suppose we already decided
  not to do it that way).  Added a J3Note in 5.2.10.

  Answer: the async attribute is conferred within the scoping unit it
          is used in, and any enclosed scoping units (internal procedures).
          In addition, for module variables given the async attribute
          explicitly in the module definition, all "users" of the
          module inherit the async attribute for that variable.  This
          includes cases where the module variable is not visible, but
          might be referenced by a namelist I/O statement.  It is not
          clear if we need to describe this.

Edits: do we need any?  We're lost here, and if edits are needed, we need a
       pointer to where to start.

  -- Richard Maine wrote -- issue 5
  Section 9.4.4 "Execution of a data transfer I/O stmt" needs work.  I
  don't think that the 2 small edits proposed look particularly close.
  For example, they leave the requirement that file positioning has to
  occur during execution of the data transfer statement, which isn't
  what we want to say.

Answer: we sort of want the file positioning to happen as if the data
        transfer had already occured (even it it hasn't).  This simplifies
        many things, including INQUIRE, file positioning for the next
	statement, etc.

  -- Richard Maine wrote -- issue 6
  I think what we probably need here is a
  separate outline of what goes on in an async data transfer, instead
  of trying to shoehorn it into the outline of the sync case, because
  there are some things that are pretty different.  In fact, I think
  it best to perhaps phrase it as a description of the whole
  operation, identifying which parts have to happen during the data
  transfer statement itself, which parts happen during the wait
  operation, and which parts can happen anytime in between.  The
  9.4.4.x subsections can probably stay largely as is (with one
  exception noted below) and referenced for both the sync and async
  outlines.  I was thinking of taking a wing at this myself, but the
  people working on the proposal probably have a better idea of the
  steps; if they don't, I'll try.  So I left out the 2 edits to the
  numbered list in 9.4.4 and instead added a J3Note.


  Answer:  A separate outline is the best solution.

Edits:
  Section 9.4.4 [153:33] change "executing a" to "executing a synchronous".
  Section 9.4.4 [153:36+], add a new list item (2.5) (actually renumber the
  entire list)
    "(2.5) Perform a wait operation for all pending I/O operations
     for the unit identified in (2).  If an error condition, end-of-file
     condition, or end-of-record condition occurs during any of the
     wait operations, execution of the current data transfer statement
     is terminated."

  Section 9.4.4 [154:1+], add a new paragraph
    "The effect of executing an asynchronous data transfer input/output
     statement shall be as if the following operations were performed
     in the order specified:

       (1) Determine the direction of data transfer

       (2) Identify the unit

       (3) Establish the format if one is specified

       (4) Position the file prior to data transfer (9.2.1.3.2)

       (5) Establish the set of storage units identified by the input/output
           list.  For a READ statement, this may require some or all of the
	   data in the file to be read, if the variable read is used
	   in an implied-do-loop in the I/O list, as a <subscript>,
	   <substring-range>, <stride>, or is otherwise referenced.

       (6) Initiate an asynchronous data transfer between the file and the
           entities specified by the input/output list (if any) or namelist.
	   The asynchronous data transfer may complete (and trigger an error,
	   end-of-file, or end-of-record condition) during the execution
	   of this data transfer statement, or during a later wait operation.

       (7) Determine whether an error condition, and end-of-file condition,
           or an end-of-record condition has occured.  The conditions may
	   occur during the execution of this data transfer statement, or
	   may occur during the execution of the corresponding wait operation.
	
	   Also, any of these conditions which would have occured during
	   the corresponding wait operation, for an already pending
	   asynchronous I/O operation whose initiating data transfer
	   statement did not contain an ID= specifier,
	   may occur during the execution of this data transfer statement.

       (8) Position the file as if the data transfer had finished (9.2.1.3.3)

       (9) Cause the variable specified in the IOSTAT= specifier to become
           defined, and the variable specified in the SIZE= specifier to
	   become undefined.

  -- Richard Maine wrote -- issue 7
  And possibly related to the preceeding question, I thought that
  the current model was that the complete i/o list for async i/o
  was supposed to be established during the data transfer statement,
  before actually doing the data transfer.  Otherwise, I'm not sure
  how the pending i/o storage sequence is well defined.  I can't
  find anywhere that says this, though.  It probably ought to be
  one of the steps mentioned in the above elaboration.  And
  paras 2-3 of 9.4.4.4 "Data transfer" directly contradict this,
  so they may need to be edited to distinguish the sync and async
  cases.  I added a J3 note in 9.4.4.4.

  Answer: Yes, the addresses  to/from which values are transfered
          need to be established during execution of the data transfer
          statement for every list item.
          The paragraph on page 150, lines 40-42 ("When an async....")
          was intended to imply this affect.

  Edits: the additional outline above addresses this

  The J3 internal note at [155:16-19] can be deleted.  The two paragraphs
  discussing that certain values are determined in the middle of the
  list processing/data transfer ARE meant to apply to async I/O, even
  though they essentially make it impossible to perform the I/O
  asynchronously.  This greatly simplified the description of how
  I/O list processing works for async I/O (the synchronous description
  is correct for async), and allowed to remove 100+ lines of edits that
  were very hard to understand.

  -- Richard Maine wrote -- issue 8
  Any particular reason why a WAIT statement can't have more than one
  ID= specifier (or alternatively a vector-valued one).  It can wait
  for multiple pending data transfers (in the case where ID= is
  omitted), so the basic semantics must be defined (in particular that
  it waits until all of them are done).  I don't see why it couldn't
  wait for multiple specified ones as well.  I didn't do anything
  about this because there is nothing wrong with it as is; I just
  wondered about why the restriction.

  Answer: There is no technical reason for this limitation.  It does
          seem difficult to use the functionality effectively, and
          therefore does not warrent the added implementation expense.

  -- Richard Maine wrote -- issue 9
  Is a WAIT statement allowed on a unit that was not opened for
  async i/o?  I see no restriction against it.  Of course, it would
  have to be the form with no ID= specifier because there won't be
  any pending data transfer operations.  We probably ought to
  answer this explicitly instead of waiting for the interp request.
  I'm not sure which answer we want - either would seem to "work."

  Answer: The Oracle says, "You are clearly spending too much time
          reading and understanding the standard.  Get a life."  :)
          However, since you mentioned it, we do want to allow a
	  WAIT (without an ID=) for units OPENed for synchronous
	  I/O and for unopened units.

  Edits:
  Section 9.5.1 [158:26+], add a new paragraph
    "Execution of a WAIT statement without an ID= specifier specifying
     a unit that does not exist, has no file connected to it, or was
     opened for synchronous I/O is permitted, and does not cause an
     error or end-of-file condition to occur."

  -- Richard Maine wrote -- issue 10
  The Para in 9.4.1.10 that tries to define pending I/O storage sequence
  affector variables needs more work than I have time for right now.
  Paper 97-216R2 put off most of the other material about such affectors
  til later; this can go with that material.

Note that the term affector is used in 5.1.2.12, and if we decide to
replace that term, said paragraph needs fixing.

Edits: not available yet

  -- Richard Maine wrote -- issue 11
  In 14.7.6(16), it violates causality to say that you need to know
  the results of the data transfer to determine which variables in a
  namelist group became undefined when the initiating READ statement
  was executed.  I deleted that exception and left it saying that they
  all become undefined.  I'm picturing that the "unchanged" ones later
  get redefined back to their original values, but that's hard to say.
  But we certainly(?!) can't make the definition status non-causal.  My
  "cop-out" in the description of the wait operation was
    "If the data transfer operation is an input operation that
     completed without error, the storage units of the I/O storage
     sequence then become defined with the values as described in
     9.4.1.9 and 9.4.4.4."
  but I'm not claiming that to be a particularly good wording.

  Answer: JOR disagrees.  It is also very difficult to describe how namelist
          variables become undefined, and it not read into, magically
	  re-acquire their original value at the wait operation.  The
	  causality argument does not appear relevant.  If the user
	  does not know which variable become undefined, he better not
	  use any of them.

Edits:
       Section 14.7.6 item (16) [297:32], change "."
       to
       ".  Variables in a namelist group which is specified in an
       asynchronous READ statement, which will not be defined during
       the execution of the READ statement or the corresponding wait
       operation, do not become undefined."

  -- Richard Maine wrote -- issue 12
  In C.6.3 the consecutive sentences
          The addresses of the list items must be computed before the
          asynchronous READ/WRITE statement completes.
          There is still an ordering requirement on list item processing,
          to handle things like READ (...) N,(a(i),i=1,N).
  sound contradictory to me since the value of N changes the addresses
  of the list items - and potentially in more complicated ways than
  just the size of a contiguous chunk.  This leaves me uncertain of
  what the actual spec is.  I added a J3 note as a reminder to address
  this.

  Answer: We decided to keep Fortran semantics for list processing.  One
          forced outcome of this requirement is that the above I/O
          statement will NEVER be done asynchronously.  The processor is
          required to detect this situation (where any item in the
          I/O list, or the number of items in the I/O list, is determined
          by a value READ during the execution of that READ statement),
          and to perform that READ synchronously.

  Edits: none needed?

  -- Richard Maine wrote -- issue 13
  I didn't yet add the words to the normative text to go with the
  explanation in the model C.6.3 that errors can be reported on any
  subsequent i/o statement for the same unit if there was no ID=.
  I think the best way to cover all the bases for this case is to
  say that any such statements may perform the wait operation.
  That would cover us on such details as making the operation and its
  async i/o storage sequence no longer be pending.  Probably not
  very hard to word, but I've just run out of time to make sure I
  do it right.  (Probably fewer words than this para, but I can be
  sloppy here).  Added a J3Note in C.6.3.

  Answer:  JOR disagrees.  One problem is that once a wait operation
  	   has been performed for a particular ID=, the user cannot
	   then WAIT for that same ID=.
	   we should not allow an error for another statement that had
	   an ID= to be reported by any stmt other than the original
	   READ/WRITE or the corresponding wait operation, and we should
	   require the processor to queue up pending errors to be reported.
	   (with some processor defined limit before the processor
	   terminates execution?)

	   We also decided a synchronous I/O statement on a unit should
	   explicitly perform a WAIT operation for all pending I/O
	   operations.

           Also, when an error occurs on any pending I/O request and
           is reported to the user, all pending requests are
           terminated, and there is no way to tell which pending operations
	   completed successfully.

Edits:
  Section 9.4.4 [154:12], change "."
    to
  ".  When an condition is raised for a previously executed asnychronous
   data transfer statement, a wait operation is performed for all pending
   I/O operations on that unit."

  Section 9.4.4 [154:14+], add a new note:
    "Note 9.xx
     Since end-of-file and error conditions for asynchronous data transfer
     statements which did not contain an ID= may be reported by the processor
     during the execution of a subsequent data transfer statement, it may
     be impossible for the user to determine which I/O statement caused
     the condition.  Reliably detecting which READ statement caused an
     end-of-file condition requires that all asynchronous READ statements
     include an ID= specifier."

  Section 9.5.2 [158:36+], add a new paragraph
    "If an error or end-of-file condition occurs during a wait operation for
    a unit, the processor will perform a wait operation for all pending data
    transfer operations for that unit."

  Section 9.5.2 [158:39} in the note, change "or during" to
    ", a subsequent synchronous data transfer statment for the same unit,
     or during".

  Section 9.5.2 [158:40] in the note, change "during the data" to
    "during a data".

-- end of paper --
