
                                                             J3/97-206

Date:        1 Aug 1997
To:          J3
From:        R. Maine
Subject:     Status of f2k edits

A version of this was sent out earlier on the email list.  Two
of the items in here seem worth highlighting.

First, there is the technical change to pointer lower bounds for
zero-sized arrays.  I have made that change in entering the edits
(contrary to what I said in the paper discussing the details - I
wrote that one earlier and forgot to update that aspect before
sending it out as a paper.)

Second, the proposed change to case (ii) of maxval and minval.
I have not made this change, but am leaning towrds doing so,
so let me know if there is objection.

I have now entered all of the approved edits for f2k.  These come
from papers 96-154, 97-156R1, 97-160R1, and 97-161R2.

I have not assigned the new document a number or put in on my
server because the edits are just in a few isolated places.  I
felt obligated to put out 97-007 as the x3j3 internal working
version of the f95 standard - people will undoubtedly want that
for interpretation work.  The changes for f2k are as yet small
enough that its silly to print out and bring to the meeting both
97-007 and the newer document.

I'll accept the next round of edits against either 96-007r1 or
97-007 (the differences there are so small that you'd have to
work really hard to make an edit that was different between these
two - if you manage such a trick, I'll cope).

I do *NOT*, however, want edits against the non-numbered and
non-available new document (and that's why its not available).
Although the places edited are very localized, there was
resulting rule renumbering from it.  Even if I asked for edits
only against this new document, I'm almost certain that some
people wouldn't bother reprinting anyway, and this could cause
confusion about rule number references.

Since we are starting on a new standard, it seems an appropriate
time to (re)raise some questions of how things will work.  I have
two general issues that I'd like some feedback on.

1. You'll notice (below and/or in the revised pages when I put them
   together) that I've been moderately "agressive" in applying
   editorial discretion in entering these edits.  That is, I've
   done a fair amount of rewording of the approved edits - more
   than I usually tended to do when we were working on f95.  Some
   of the "editorial" discretion was even applied to fixing
   technical issues (see the pointer lower bounds stuff).

   I dunno why I always see a lot more to rework after I actually
   sit down to enter the edits, even when I thought I carefully
   studied the edits before they passed - but it always seems to
   happen.

   Of course, J3 can always object to specific cases of my
   rewording (so tell me if you object to any of the ones below).
   The general question is whether you want me to back off and do
   less rewording in the first place, sticking more closely to
   whatever is passed.

   I have heard at least some informal comments from people that
   I interpreted as them hoping I'd "just do it."

   If you don't like me doing this level of editing, now's a good
   time to speak up (so I don't waste so much of my time doing it
   and J3's time telling me to undo it).

2. Somewhat related question, really.  In the past, I've usually tried
   to report every comma that I entered differently from the
   edits as passed.  There were a few exceptions where it was
   just to hard to detail the changes and I just said that there
   was significant rewriting of xxx and to see the draft for the
   result.

   If I'm going to be doing moderate editing, along the lines of
   what I did for these papers, then it can sometimes be as much
   (or even more) work to describe the edits in detail as to
   actually do them.

   I'd be tempted to lower the level of detail given in my
   editing reports.  That is just to state things like that I did
   moderate rewording in area xxx for reason yyy instead off
   trying to detail exactly how I reworded it.  I would certainly
   need to give enough detail for people to find the parts that I
   reworded, but my reports would emphasise more where the
   rewording was and why I did it (in cases where there were
   non-trivial reasons), instead of what the changes were.

   I get the feeling that a lot of my detailed reports aren't
   always read that carefully anyway.  And its more important for
   people to be reviewing the actual draft standard document.

   This might actually help me highlight the more significant
   issues that I find, instead of burying them in between changed
   commas.  (Speaking of which, there are some technical issues
   and some specific questions below - don't miss them - perhaps
   well illustrates my point).

   Of course, the option in the "other direction" is that I
   shouldn't make any changes at all, even to spelling and
   grammar, so there won't ever be anything to detail.  But I
   think you were looking for more than a typist.  (I'm pretty
   poor as typists go, though its true that the selection among
   those willing to work for this salary is a bit limited, even
   after my recent raise from -$600 to $0 per year :-)).

End of general questions.  Specific editing details follow.

  96-154 - pointer lower bounds
     Simplified wording of the new constraint by changing
        "specified shall be equal to" -> "shall equal"
     The "specified" doesn't seem to add anything in this context,
     and the active voice is more succinct.

     Technical change - added "If <bounds-spec-list> is specified, "
     at the beginning of the constraint.  Otherwise, it might
     imply that the bounds-spec-list always had to be specified
     for arrays.  Hmm, that brings to mind another technical
     question.

     Technical change - added another constraint (preceding the
     above-mentioned one):
       "A <bounds-spec-list> is allowed only if <pointer-object>
        is an array."
     I don't believe that anything else otherwise prohibits
        P() => T
     for scalars.  (I suppose we could allow it, but I doubt that
     was intended).

     Substantial editorial change in the description of how the
     bounds are specified.  Most significantly, moved the whole
     description into section 7.5.2, where it really belongs as
     part of the description of the pointer assignment statement.
     If we didn't move it, there should at least be an xref in
     section 7.5.2.  I've had trouble finding this material
     before.  I made item (2) on page 55 just a single sentence
     referencing 7.5.2 for details.  I used the first sentence
     from the paper 96-154, with the xref added.  Note that this
     is consistent with how item (1) in the same list is done.
     Item (1) has a single sentence referencing 6.3.1 for
     details.

     Also in that description, re-ordered the sentences to follow
     the same structure as used in 5.1.2.4 on assumed shape
     arrays.  Namely, the sentences about extent and upper bounds
     come first, followed by the definition of the lower bounds.
     The paper 96-154 version has the upper bound discussion
     between the 2 cases of lower bounds, possibly making it
     confusing whether it applies to both lower bound cases or
     only one.  A few other small editorial changes to go better
     with being in section 7.5.2 (like using bnf terms, since it
     is right below the bnf definition).

     Technical change - removed the special case for zero
     extents.  See separate paper discussing that.  This change
     provisional on x3j3 agreement.  (Well, ok, so are all of the
     changes, but this one seems to me more likely to be
     questionable).

     That's enough changes to be hard to picture, so here's the
     resulting para that I put in 7.5.2.  (Hey, cut and paste
     from Frame to xemacs works - neat.  Loses the fonts and
     equations, but does get the words).

        The extent of a dimension of <pointer-object> is the
        extent of the corresponding dimension of <target>.  If
        the lower bound value is d and the extent of the
        corresponding dimension of <target> is s, then the value
        of the upper bound is s+d-1.  If a <bounds-spec-list> is
        present, it specifies the lower bounds; otherwise, the
        lower bound of each dimension is the result of the
        intrinsic function LBOUND (13.14.53) applied to the
        corresponding dimension of <target>.

  97-156R1 - min/max for char args.
     In the first sentence of the result characteristics for max
     and min, added "The", "of the result" and "those of".

     Added a comma in the last sentence of case (i) and (ii) for
     maxval and minval.

     Re-ordered the phrases of case (i) and case (iii) in maxval
     and minval so that the distinguishing characteristic of the
     case appears first.  (It already does in case (ii), and it
     did in case (i) in f95).  Otherwise, it might appear at
     first glance like case (i) covers the non-zero sized arrays.
     Instead, case (i) covers both zero and non-zero size; the
     distinguishing factor is which arguments are present.

     The form relevant to each case then being clearer, we can
     then just say "the result" instead of repeatedly spelling
     out the whole form in case (i) and (ii).  (Case (iii)
     already did this, perhaps because the form got long enough
     to exceed someone else's tolerance for the needless
     repetition).

     I had minor reservations in case (ii) about referring to
     "true elements" of MASK, instead of something about elements
     with the value .TRUE. (all the elements are "true elements",
     as opposed perhaps to virtual elements), but I decided not
     to do anything about it because it would complicate the
     sentence structure quite a bit, it was that way in f90 and
     f95, we are probably equally careless with the same kind of
     wording elsewhere, and I doubt anyone will actually be
     confused.

     I was very tempted to (but did not yet) majorly simplify
     case (ii) of maxval by replacing it with
        The result of MAXVAL(ARRAY, MASK) is equal to that of
        MAXVAL( PACK(ARRAY, MASK)).
     and correspondingly for minval.  Note that this completely
     replaces 9-10 lines (for each intrinsic) having multiple
     conditions.  Probably the only reason I didn't make the
     change is that it didn't occur to me until after I got the
     long version typed in, and I don't want to have to type in
     in twice if my proposed change is rejected.  Soliciting
     inputs on this.

  97-160R1 - system clock.

     Inserted the example as normative text, in the same style as
     all other examples in section 13.14.  There is not a single
     example in the entire intrinsics section that is in a shaded
     note.

     Removed the "1,193,180/65,536 or" from the example; it is
     completely irrelevant and adds no content relevant to the
     Fortran standard...and the extra "or" made the sentence
     structure a bit hard to follow in conjunction with the
     following change.

     Changed the "Assume that" back to "If" (and correspondingly
     change ". At" to ", at") as in the original example.  There
     is no obvious reason for the change in style, particularly
     since the original style seems preferable.  The use of
     "assume" in the imperative in normative text might possibly
     be misconstrued as a requirement on the compiler - in this
     case that the compiler is required to assume this particular
     count rate.  A bit far-fetched perhaps, but the conditional
     form using "if" avoids the question.  I cannot find "assume"
     used in the imperative anywhere else in normative text (and
     only once in a note).

     Changed back to commas instead of semicolons to separate the
     3 values in the last 2 lines of the example; and added the
     period back onto the end of the sentence.  Again, these were
     changed from the f90/95 version for no obvious reason (and
     the original seems better).

     This whole paper excellently illustrates a basic point of
     preparing edits.  Please do *NOT* phrase edits as replacing
     a whole section when the actual changes are much smaller.
     If there are extensive changes, so that it is hard to
     describe or follow the actual edits, then yes, replacing the
     whole section is probably reasonable.  But please use at
     least some judgement in the matter.  That was clearly not
     the case for this paper.  There was a 1-word deletion in the
     6-line description of COUNT.  For that trivial edit, I'm
     supposed to retype the whole thing, introducing new typos in
     parts allegedly unchanged?  I think not.  What I did instead
     was visually "diff" the original with the new version to
     find the 1-word difference.  My visual diff skills aren't
     that good; I'll miss things.  (And when I'm having to do
     things that I'm not good at, I get grouchy and write things
     like this).

     The fact that I was having to do a visual diff is what drew
     my attention to several of the changes that appeared
     unintentional.

  97-161R2 - lower case.

     Changed the second sentence from plural to singular as
     preferred style.  (Yes, I know the f90/95 text was plural
     here, but might as well fix it anyway).

     Fixed the example to be consistent with style used
     elsewhere.  Namely, we tag them as "notes" and don't start
     them with "Example:"

     Used colon instead of period at the end of the lead-in
     sentence in the note.
