
                                                                J3/97-211

Date:     August 8, 1997
To:       J3
From:     DIN/Wolfgang Walter & Baker Kearfott
Subject:  Recommendations for the Development
          of Interval Arithmetic in Fortran 2000

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         WG5  N 1303

Recommendations for the Development of Interval Arithmetic in Fortran 2000

1.  Investigate the possibility of extending the Fortran character set,
e.g. by adding square brackets  [  and  ]  (which are useful for many
reasons, most of them not connected with intervals) and possibly other
characters.  For characters that are not universally representable,
investigate alternative, universally portable representations using only
the current Fortran character set.

2. Introduce "interval types" in a way that is orthogonal to the existing
way of specifying numeric intrinsic types. One way of doing this is to
introduce a new type parameter (which could be termed FORM type parameter)
in addition to the kind type parameter for REAL - in such a way that it
can be extended to other intrinsic types, e.g. COMPLEX and INTEGER.
(Please also refer to document WG5  V16.)

This will allow building a mirror image of the specification structure of
the existing numeric types for the new interval types (in the long term).
Implementation restrictions on the set of admissible kind-parameter values
for interval types might be allowed initially, and might be disallowed in
a future standard.

An example of the intended kind of syntax is:

      REAL ( KIND = KIND(0.0D0), [ FORM = ] INTERVAL )

(This new type parameter could also be used for other purposes, e.g. to
specify a type for fuzzy logic.)

The introduction of completely new intrinsic type statements for interval
types is viewed as being more controversial, a bigger burden on the
language, and not easily extensible.

3. Add the new operators required for interval arithmetic in such a way
that they have their natural precedence. In particular, the new relational
operators should have the same precedence as the existing relationals, and
the operators for "intersection" and "interval hull" should have higher
precedence than these.

Since this constitutes a change of the language that will potentially
change the interpretation of existing programs, it is proposed that
specific measures, which could be in the spirit of the following two,
be taken to greatly reduce or eliminate the impact of this incompatibility:

a) reduce the likelihood of collisions with operator names in existing
code by choosing more explicit, interval-specific names,

   and/or

b) make new interval operators (and other interval features) available
only via special action on the part of the programmer, e.g. when a use
statement for an intrinsic interval module is specified.

4. In the hope of resolving the discussions about the two seemingly
incompatible semantic models of interval arithmetic, we would like to
suggest another viewpoint.

Let us define the two models as

a)  the "set-theoretic" model where all operands/arguments are interpreted
    as independent sets,

and

b)  the "functional" model, where operands/arguments which are formally
    the same variable are interpreted as being dependent sets.

We strongly believe that the fundamental definition of the elementary
operators and intrinsic functions should follow the set-theoretic model
and thus the runtime semantics of these individual operations should be
unambiguously defined.  However, we also believe that tighter interval
enclosures produced by applying the functional model to whole expressions
or sections of code are highly desirable in many cases.

We propose that optimizations (e.g. algebraic simplifications) which are
possible under the functional model be explicitly allowed - conceptually
during a preprocessing phase - and that the stricter set-theoretic model
be applied to the code resulting from this phase.

We also believe that the user should be given the power to require strict
interpretation of his/her code according to the set-theoretic model, i.e.
it should be possible to prohibit optimizations which are possible under
the functional model, at least globally, but possibly also locally by
other selective means.

---------------------------------------------------------------
R. Baker Kearfott,       rbk@usl.edu      (318) 482-5346 (fax)
(318) 482-5270 (work)                     (318) 981-9744 (home)
URL: http://interval.usl.edu/kearfott.html
Department of Mathematics, University of Southwestern Louisiana
USL Box 4-1010, Lafayette, LA 70504-1010, USA
---------------------------------------------------------------
