


                                                                J3/97-246

Date:         20 October 1997
To:           J3
From:         Larry Rolison
Subject:      Interpretation Request: INTENT of MOLD Argument to TRANSFER

NUMBER:       9
TITLE:        INTENT of MOLD argument to TRANSFER
KEYWORDS:     intrinsic function, TRANSFER, MOLD
DEFECT TYPE:  Interpretation
STATUS:       X3J3 consideration in progress

BACKGROUND:
Dick Hendrickson submitted the background and questions contained in this 
interpretation request.  Since there was no "official" reply forthcoming,
I've taken the liberty (with Dick's kind permission) of submitting his
informal question as a formal interpretation request.  I have adapted his
original email message and the reply he got from Rich Maine to the basic
interp request format so some of the words in this interp request are mine,
not theirs.  Any errors of interpretation of their words are mine.  This 
background section can probably be deleted in a later phase of the
interpretation processing.


QUESTION:
In 13.3 [page 218:2], Fortran 95 states:

  The nonpointer dummy arguments of the generic intrinsic procedures in
  13.14 have INTENT(IN) if the intent is not stated explicitly.

In general, an actual argument that corresponds to a dummy argument that does
not have the INTENT(IN) attribute does not need to be defined; you need to
look at the particulars of the invoked procedure to decide if an actual
argument needs to be defined before the invocation.

It is likely that the only intrinsic procedure argument affected by this 
change in wording is the MOLD argument to the TRANSFER function.  The value
of the MOLD argument is never needed so there is no reason to define it before
invoking TRANSFER in a Fortran 90 program.  But, apparently it needs to be
defined in a Fortran 95 program.  

This could break a program that uses a local name in a subroutine as the
MOLD argument and doesn't always define the name with a value, or didn't
save it.  

In this case, MOLD is like the arguments to the numeric inquiry 
functions, the "attribute" is a compile time characteristic, not a run-time
"value" and should have the same exception as for the inquiry functions.

(1) Was general statement about INTENT(IN) quoted above intentionally added
    to the Fortran 95 standard (how did it get into the standard)?

(2) Is it the intent of the standard to apply this general statement to the
    MOLD argument of the TRANSFER intrinsic function?


ANSWER:
(1) Yes.  The cited text was became a part of the Fortran 95 standard as a 
    result of applying the edits in Interpretation Request 184 to the Fortran
    90 standard.  The edits applied by Interpretation Request are included
    in Corrigendum 3.

    [ Thanks to Richard Maine for providing this clue.  This comment should
      be removed in later processing.  Just wanted to give credit where
      credit was due. ]

(2)


EDITS:

SUBMITTED BY:  Larry Rolison / Dick Hendrickson
HISTORY:  J3/97-246 m143 submitted



----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Larry Rolison                      lrr@cray.com
Cray Research, A Silicon Graphics Company
655F Lone Oak Drive
Eagan, MN  55121 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

