                                                        J3 / 97-215

Date:        11 Aug 1997
To:          J3
From:        R. Maine
Subject:     Correspondence about f90 opengl bindings

The following are excerpts from my recent correspondence with
William F. Mitchell on this subject.

-----------------------------------------------------------------
From: mitchell@cam.nist.gov (William F Mitchell)
To: maine@altair.dfrc.nasa.gov
Subject: Re:  Fortran 90 OpenGL bindings
Date: Wed, 30 Jul 97 14:07:26 EDT


Richard,

Thank you for responding for my request for feedback on the proposed
Fortran 90 bindings for OpenGL last month.  I am sorry I took so long to
get back to you, but I have been on travel and other assignments.
I only received four replies to my request, and truly appreciate your
taking the time to be one of them.

I don't think the OpenGL ARB will adopt my proposal unless I provide
supporting comments from Fortran experts.  Most of them are not familiar
with Fortran and do not feel qualified to assess the proposal.  So I must
request help from the Fortran experts, and it would be very much appreciated
if you could read through the proposal.  If you think it sounds reasonable,
please send some supportive comments that I could forward to the OpenGL ARB.
You can obtain a copy of the technical report from the f90gl web page
http://math.nist.gov/f90gl or from my web page (URL in .sig).

The common comment in the responses I received was to examine the ISO
Technical Report on interoperability between Fortran and C.  I have read this
report.  I thought that it might make the Fortran 90 binding for OpenGL
obsolete, but I do not believe this is the case.  Instead, I think it will
provide the means for a portable _implementation_ of the binding.  The
binding itself is defined entirely from the Fortran side, so the
interoperability of Fortran and C is not an issue in the proposed bindings,
just in an implementation of them.  This is another major difference from the
fortran 77 bindings for OpenGL which I should have included in the list that
you have seen.  I will be adding:

   The Fortran 90 interface to OpenGL is defined entirely on the Fortran side
   of the Fortran/C interface, so the issues associated with interoperability
   between Fortran and C are hidden from the user.

Thank you,
-- Bill

William F. Mitchell                              | william.mitchell@nist.gov
Mathematical and Computational Sciences Division | na.wmitchell@na-net.ornl.gov
National Institute of Standards and Technology   | Voice: (301) 975-3808
Gaithersburg, MD 20899                           | Fax:   (301) 990-4127
http://math.nist.gov/acmd/Staff/WMitchell/
------------------------------------------------------

maine> Do you mind me submitting your email and the tech report to J3 as a
maine> paper at its August meeting?

I'm not sure what you mean by submitting it as a paper, but anything that can
drum up interest is welcome.  This may be a good opportunity for some of the
Fortran experts to discuss it and provide some feedback....

maine> Mostly submitting it as a paper means that
maine> it is copied for everyone there and becomes part of the public record
maine> of the meeting.  I can't guarantee that any time will be allocated to
maine> discussing it (almost certainly not a lot of time), but submitting it
maine> as a paper would be necessary to have much chance of that.

Yes, that's fine.  As a NIST IR it's already public.  I wasn't really expecting
much discussion in the meetings proper -- I'm sure a pretty full agenda already
exists -- but was thinking it might come up at coffee breaks, etc.  Whatever
works!

Thanks,
-- Bill
