
                                                         J3/97-222r1

Date:     August 15, 1997
To:       J3	
From:     /Interval_1
Subject:  Assignment Operators

Sparked by the work on intervals, we propose adding a new assignment
operator (:=), changing the default meaning of the existing assignment
operator (=), and providing a mechanism for specifying the old
semantics for =. These changes to be part of the base standard (part
I), therefore we request a new work item be created. Over the next
several meetings, we can expect to settle on semantics, syntax and
edits in the usual fashion. However, to simplify the process, we shall
start with the syntax proposed in 97-199 for the time being.

Requirement

The Fortran Standard prohibits interline optimization (interpretation
1, follows). With these additions to the Standard, the example
transformations from that interpretation, as written will be Standard
conforming; when written with := they will not be Standard
conforming. As written, with the addition of the "magic switch" they
will not be Standard conforming.

Justification

Fortran is intended as a language for high performance
computation. Any processor used for high performance work is expected
by users (and vendors) to routinely do interline optimization. The
Standard's prohibiting such transformations relegates the Standard to
formally applying to only uninteresting situations (that is
effectively no optimization).

By introducing new notation, we permit users to say precisely what
they mean (thus allowing processors latitude where acceptable, and
providing specific results where the user requires it). By changing
the default to conform to common usage, we accommodate existing
practice. By providing an escape hatch to return to pre-F2K semantics,
we preserve compatibility.

While no longer tied to interval arithmetic per se, the advantages of
this scheme for intervals are even greater for intervals than for REAL
kinds.

Previous papers one may wish to keep in mind when pondering this topic
are: 97-158 and 97-198. The informal term "macro" was intended to make
the concept more clear; during committee debate it is clear that it
did not. At this point we suggest "mathematical assignment" and "value
assignment" as working names.

NUMBER: 000001
TITLE: Optimization of Fortran programs
DEFECT TYPE: Interpretation
STATUS: Published
QUESTION: Given a fragment such as
 
      10  SUM = A + B
      20  D   = SUM + C
 
does the standard allow the processor the freedom to replace this two
statement fragment with any of the following single statements:
 
     100  D = (A + B) + C
     110  D = A + (B + C)
     120  D = (A + C) + B
     130  D = (B + A) + C
     140  D = C + (B + A)
 
ANSWER: The Fortran standard grants to processors an unlimited freedom
to reorganize and modify programs, provided only that the execution
"fulfills the interpretations herein" (1.4).  In sections 7.1.7.1,
7.1.7.3, and elsewhere, specific additional freedoms are granted
processors in expression evaluation.  Generally speaking, all of these
freedoms support what is called "optimization", the altering of the
program in some way that is thought to improve a specific property,
often performance, of the program.
 
In this particular case SUM, in statement 20, is not an expression,
but a reference to the result of a previous assignment.  The
additional freedoms granted for expression evaluation do not apply.
Thus only those processors that can make the replacement and still
"fulfill the interpretations herein" are permitted to do so.  For
these processors the answer is yes, for all other processors the
answer is no.
 
The "interpretation herein" is that SUM is a primary (7.1.1.1) of the
expression "SUM + C" and the reference to SUM requires its value
(Section 6, first paragraph).  The determination of SUM's value was
specified by assignment statement 10.  The result of that assignment,
with its possible conversions of "A + B" to the type and type
parameters of SUM, is the value of SUM.  This is the interpretation
that must be fulfilled by conforming processors.
 
A common optimization for this fragment is to replace it by statements
such as 100, 130, etc.  where the calculation of A + B appears in
parenthesis.  This replacement corresponds to the calculation of A + B
in a temporary location (i.e., a register) and then accessing that
temporary location instead of storing the result in SUM and then
accessing that stored value.

Discussion

The C language has a concept of "sequence points". Loosely speaking, a
sequence point is a barrier to optimization. The ":=" is intended to
provide selective barrier. So

	SUM = A + B
	SUM2:= D+E
      	D2   = SUM + C
 
In this context, := would not inhibit transforms involving A,B, SUM,
etc. However, if SUM2:=SUM+E, the computation of SUM shall complete
before the assignment into the memory location corresponding to
SUM2. It is also intended that := requires an actual storage to memory
(somewhat akin to volatile in C), this can be helpful in careful
coding on a machine with extended precision registers (of course, some
users might very much like a way to state positively that they want
SUM to be stored in such registers in preference to other
variables. This proposal does not offer a hook for them per se).

Some potential straw votes:
Limit := to numeric types only (minimizes edits/hazards, but arguably
inconsistent). Y|n|U 1-11-5 

Apply to intrinsic types only? Y|n|u not taken (moot)

Names "mathematical and value" assignment, symbolic and value, value
and "plain" assignment 3-5-3-6 

New  mathematical = "could" be defined rather differently than
7.5/7.5.1 currently works. For example, it need not be the point at
which a variable actually becomes defined or redefined. Would J3
prefer that ":="  be as close to "=" as possible, or maximally
permissive? (lazy vs. not) 10-1-3 


We could handle the default switch via:
Required processor dependent, compile "line option"/switch  14
Introduce c$Pragma | c$dir or similar syntax                 2
Hijack USE statement, e.g. USE pre-F2k-assignment            0 
Undecided						     1
Should we work on providing a way to specifically request *extra*
precision for a specific variable (alas,  that might be another late
arriving work item; probably a qualifier on the variable itself)
subgroup doesn't  recommend this. 0-17-0 (noted that kind= for such a
type could be provided already) 
Interline optimization to be worked on at all 12-0-5
