	To: J3						J3/98-163
	From: R. Bleikamp/JOR		 	      page 1 of 2
	Subject: Environment Variables / M.18b
	Date: 98-05-28
	
	For a history of the previous work in this area, see papers
	97-151r1, 97-153, 97-201, 97-203, and 98-115.
	
	Specification for Environment Variable support in F2000.
	
	  - Add an intrinsic routine to get the "value" of a named
	    (user specified) environment variable.
	
	  - Pass in the name of the environment variable.  Need to
	    support (perhaps painfully) significant trailing blanks
	    in the environment variable's name.
	
	  - Return a character string representing the value of
	    the environment variable.  Some method of determining
	    a non-existent variable (or unsupported functionality) 
	    is required.  Some way of determining which (if any)
	    trailing blanks are significant, as well as if the
	    value returned had to be truncated.
	
	  - Avoid commonly used names for this functionality,
	    so existing programs will not be impacted.
	
	
	Syntax for Environment Variable support in F2000.
	
	  call get_environment_variable (name, value [,length]
					 [,trim_name])
	
	    name: a scalar character value (default kind), INTENT(IN).
		  the name of the environment variable of interest.
	
	    value: a scalar character variable (default kind),
	          INTENT(OUT). 
	    	  the value of the environment variable specified by
		  "name" is returned in this argument.  When the
		  value is shorter than LEN(value), the value is blank
		  padded on the right.  When the value is longer than
		  LEN(value), the leftmost LEN(value) characters of
		  the environment variables value will be stored in
		  "value".

		  When the environment variable does not exist, or does
		  not have a value, "value" will be assigned all blanks.
	
	    length: a scalar default integer variable, INTENT(OUT),
	          OPTIONAL.
	          When present, this variable is set to the length of
		  the specified environment variable.
		  When "length" is negative, the specified environment
		  variable was not present or the processor does not
		  support enviroment variables.  

		  When "length" is zero, the specified environment
		  variable was present, but had no value.  
	       						J3/98-163
	                     		 	      page 2 of 2

		  When "length" is positive, "value" contains the value
		  of the specified environment variable.  If the value
		  of "length" is less than LEN(value), "value" is padded
		  on the right with blanks.
		  If "length" is greater than LEN(value), the returned
		  value was truncated from the right. 

	    trim_name: a scalar logical value, INTENT(IN), OPTIONAL.
		  When present with the value false, trailing blanks
		  in "name" are considered significant if the
		  processor supports significant trailing blanks in
		  an environment variable name.  Otherwise, trailing
		  blanks in "name" are not considered part of the
		  environment variable's name.
	
	    Note: an environment variable is a named object, specifiable
	          via some mechanism outside the scope of this standard.
	
	Edits:
	  Insert above text in chapter 13 in the obvious place.
