                                                      J3/98-196r1

          Date:        1998/08/13
          To:          J3
          From:        Interop
          Subject:     Interoperability syntax (Part 3):  Global Data
                       and Name Mangling
          References:  J3/98-132r1, J3/98-139, J3/98-165r1

          Global Data
          -----------

          In Fortran, there are two facilities for specifying global
          data:  common blocks and modules.  The existing practice for
          sharing global data between Fortran and C is to use common
          blocks with the same name as the C object with external
          linkage.  The interoperability facility could build off of
          such existing practice.

          Alternatively, the facility proposed in the Interoperability
          PDTR could be used.  That facility permitted the BIND(C)
          attribute to be specified for variables declared in the
          scope of a module.  This has the virtue that it builds upon
          the more modern Fortran feature.  It has the disadvantage
          that, the way it was specified, it brought the baggage of
          common association with it.  For example,

                module mod
                  integer, bind(c, name='cglob') :: i
                  integer, bind(c, name='cglob') :: j
                end module mod

                program p
                  use mod
                  j = 3
                  i = 17
                  print *, j  ! Now j has the value 17!
                end program p

          We propose to use the same specification, with the
          restriction that only one variable that is associated with a
          particular C variable with external linkage is permitted to
          be declared within a program.  This eliminates the common
          association baggage.  In addition, the BIND(C) attribute
          will be permitted to be specified for a named common block,
          to facilitate support of existing practice.

          For uniformity with other attributes, a BIND(C) attribute
          statement will also be introduced.

          For example,

                integer, bind(c) :: i
                integer :: j, k
                common/com/ k
                bind(c) :: j, /com/

          The BIND(C) attribute shall only be specified for a variable
          if it is declared in the scope of a module.  The variable
          shall interoperate with the C type of the associated C
          variable that has external linkage.  The variable shall not
          be explicitly initialized, it shall not have the POINTER
          attribute, the ALLOCATABLE attribute, appear in an
          EQUIVALENCE statement or be a member of a common block.

          If a common block is given the BIND(C) attribute, it shall
          be given the BIND(C) attribute in all scoping units in
          which it is declared.  A C variable with external linkage
          interoperates with a common block that has the BIND(C)
          attribute, if the C variable is of a struct type and the
          variables that are members of the common block interoperate
          with components of the struct type, or if the common block
          contains a single variable, and the variable interoperates
          with the C variable.

          A variable in a common block with the BIND(C) attribute
          shall not be explicitly initialized and it shall not be the
          parent object of an <equivalence-object> in an EQUIVALENCE
          statement.

          If a variable or common block has the BIND(C) attribute, it
          has the SAVE attribute as well.

          A variable with the BIND(C) attribute is a global entity of
          a program (14.1.1).  Such an entity shall not be declared in
          more than one scoping unit of the program.

          Name Mangling
          -------------

          Paper 98-139 contained an outline for syntax for mapping
          Fortran variable and procedure names to C variable and
          function names.  That proposal is restated here.

          The BIND <prefix-spec> and attribute have an additional,
          optional specifier, NAME=.  If neither NAME= nor BINDNAME=
          is specified, NAME= is assumed to have a value that is the
          same as the name specified for the variable or procedure in
          lower case.

          Note:  This is an arbitrary choice, but it seems like the
                 reasonable one, since few users of C write their
                 functions with names that are entirely in upper case.

          An additional BINDNAME= attribute may also appear.  At most
          one NAME= specifier is permitted to appear in a BIND
          <prefix-spec> or attribute.  More than one BINDNAME=
          specifier may appear in a BIND <prefix-spec> for a
          subprogram, but not an interface body or the BIND attribute
          for a variable.

          Any leading and trailing blanks in the value of a NAME=
          specifier are ignored.  The value of the NAME= specifier on
          an interface body or variable must correspond to some C
          function or variable, respectively, with the same name.

          Note:  The intent here is that NAME= allows the user to
                 specify C names that are not valid Fortran names, and
                 provides a mechanism through which the processor can
                 distinguish between upper and lower case.

          Section 14.1.1 states that "A name that identifies a global
          entity shall not be used to identify any other global
          entity in the same program."  This rule needs to be extended
          to make it clear that the value of the NAME= specifier might
          identify a global entity, and it shall not be used to
          identify any other global entity - the value isn't
          necessarily a name in the Fortran sense, so some
          modification of the existing rule is required.

          This has the effect that two external procedures might have
          the same name, but still be distinct entities, because the
          values specified by NAME= specifiers might be different.
          For example,

                program p
                  interface
                    bind(c,name='CSub') subroutine c_sub
                    end subroutine c_sub
                  end interface

                  call f_sub
                end program p

                subroutine f_sub
                  interface
                    bind(c,name='CSub2') subroutine c_sub
                    end subroutine c_sub
                  end interface
                end subroutine f_sub


          The meaning ascribed to the BINDNAME= specifier is
          processor-dependent.

          Note:  The value of the BINDNAME= specifier is intended to
                 specify one or more alternative names by which a
                 procedure defined by Fortran may be referenced from
                 C, when a user wants to build a library that supports
                 multiple C processors at once.  The name is a
                 (potentially) mangled name, rather than the name that
                 is actually specified in the C code.
