


                                                        J3/98-234
                                                        page 1 of 2
	To: J3					      
	From: R. Bleikamp/JOR		 	      
	Subject: Environment Variable Edits / M.18b
	Date: 98-11-10
	
	For a history of the previous work in this area, see papers
	97-151r1, 97-153, 97-201, 97-203, 98-115, and 98-163r1 (specs).
	
	Edits for Environment Variable support in F2000.

	Add the following in Chapter 13.

	13.14.xxx    GET_ENVIRONMENT_VARIABLE (name,
					       value
					       [,length]
					       [,trim_name])

	    Description.  Get the value of an environement variable.

	    Class: Subroutine.

	    Arguments:
	
	    name: shall be scalar and of type default character.  It is
                  an INTENT(IN) argument.
	
	    value: shall be a scalar variable of type default integer.
	          It is an INTENT(OUT) argument.
	    	  The value of the environment variable specified by
		  "name" is returned in this argument.  When the
		  value is shorter than LEN(value), the value is blank
		  padded on the right.  When the value is longer than
		  LEN(value), the leftmost LEN(value) characters of
		  the environment variables value will be stored in
		  "value".

		  When the environment variable does not exist, does
		  not have a value, or the processor does not support
                  environment variables, "value" will be assigned all
		  blanks.
	



                                                        J3/98-234
                                                        page 2 of 2

	    length (optional): shall be a scalar variable of type
                  default integer.  It is an INTENT(OUT) argument.
	          When present, this variable is set to the length of
		  the specified environment variable.
		  When "length" is set to the value -1, the specified
		  environment variable was not present.  When "length"
		  is set to the value -2, the processor does not support
		  enviroment variables.
		  The processor may return other other negative values
		  in "length" for other error conditions.

		  When "length" is set to a value of zero, the
		  specified environment variable was present, but had
		  no value.
  
		  When "length" is set to a positive value, "value"
		  contains the value of the specified environment
		  variable.  If the value of "length" is less than
		  LEN(value), "value" is padded on the right with blanks.
		  If "length" is greater than LEN(value), the returned
		  value was truncated from the right. 

	    trim_name (optional): shall be a scalar value of type
	          logical.  It is an INTENT(IN) argument.
		  When "trim_name" is present with the value false,
		  trailing blanks in "name" are considered significant
		  if the processor supports significant trailing blanks
		  in an environment variable name.  Otherwise, trailing
		  blanks in "name" are not considered part of the
		  environment variable's name.
	
	    Note: an environment variable is a named object, specifiable
	          via some mechanism outside the scope of this standard.
