
                                                                   J3/99-177

Date:     1999/07/12
To:       J3
From:     Henry Zongaro
Subject:  Interpretation request on I/O errors


NUMBER:
TITLE:  Errors in processing data transfer statements
KEYWORDS: ERR=; IOSTAT=; Data transfer statements
DEFECT TYPE:
STATUS:
QUESTION:
Consider the following program.

      INTEGER :: A(10), IDX, J
      OPEN(10, FORM='UNFORMATTED', ACCESS='SEQUENTIAL', STATUS='OLD',         &
     &         ACTION='READ')
      READ(10, IOSTAT=IOS) IDX, J, A(IDX)
      END

If an error occurs while processing the variable J in the data transfer
statement, does this program become non-standard conforming?

According to 9.4.3:

    "If an error condition or an end-of-file condition occurs during
     execution of an input/output statement, execution of the input/output
     statement terminates and if the input/output statement contains any
     implied-DOs, all of the implied-DO variables in the statement become
     undefined.  If an error condition occurs during execution of an
     input/output statement, the position of the file becomes
     indeterminate.

     If an error or end-of-file condition occurs on input, all input list
     items become undefined."

According to 9.4.4:

     "The effect of executing a data transfer input/output statement shall
      be as if the following operations were performed in the order
      specified:

      (1) Determine the direction of data transfer
      (2) Identify the unit
      (3) Establish the format if one is specified
      (4) Position the file prior to data transfer (9.2.1.3.2)
      (5) Transfer data between the file and the entities specified by the
          input/output list (if any) or namelist
      (6) Determine whether an error condition, an end-of-file condition,
          or an end-of-record condition has occurred
      (7) Position the file after data transfer (9.2.1.3.3)
      (8) Cause any variables specified in the IOSTAT= and SIZE= specifiers
          to become defined."

A simple reading of this seems to indicate that the point at which the error
occurs and is detected by a standard-conforming processor is unspecified.
Because IDX becomes undefined, the reference to IDX in the variable A(IDX) is
incorrect.  However, this is a very common style of coding I/O operations in
Fortran.

Was it the committee's intent that such a program should not be standard-
conforming in the presence of an error condition?  Or does the fact that the
error occurred before the item A(IDX) was processed mean that there was no
reference to IDX, and hence, that the program is standard-conforming?

ANSWER:
EDIT:
SUBMITTED BY:  Henry Zongaro
HISTORY:  99-177   m150 submitted
