
                                                            J3/99-255

Date:    15th November 1999
To:      J3
From:    Malcolm Cohen
Subject: Generalised Structure Constructors


1. Introduction

Resolution C1 from the 1999 WG5 meeting in Cadarache adds the requirement:
  "add the generalization of structure constructors, as described in
   WG5-N1355".

WG5-N1355 has been electronically available for some time (as a WG5 paper,
not a J3 paper).  This paper is based on N1355, though an attempt has been
made to make it self-contained.

2. Requirement

>From WG5-N1355:
  "Users should be permitted to override the intrinsic data-type structure
   constructor by the creation of procedures with a generic name that is the
   same as the type-name. The same rules should be applied, mutatis
mutandis,
   as already exist for overriding intrinsic definitions for the semantics
of
   intrinsic assignment and intrinsic functions by user written generic
   procedures.

   ...

   Although this proposal will not in general allow the creation of user
   defined derived type objects with the PARAMETER attribute, nor will it
make
   initialisation more generally supportable.  It will, however, allow
   appropriately named user-defined type-conversion procedures to be used to
   create values of derived types.  For example, given a type definition for
   variable precision arithmetic based on a type,

      TYPE NUMBER
        INTEGER::exp
        INTEGER,POINTER::sig(:)
      END TYPE NUMBER

   The user could define additional generic procedures called NUMBER.  One
   specific version could take a single integer argument and another could
take
   a character string argument; both designed to return a value of the
NUMBER
   datatype.  This will allow the following set of statements to be valid.

      type(NUMBER)::ten,c
      ten=NUMBER(10)
      c=NUMBER("2.99792458E+8")

   With a data type such as this the user has no simple way of using the
   intrinsic value constructors to create the structure values.  Usable
values
   can only be created by procedures written by the user to provide a more
   appropriate type conversion.   In general, the logical name for such
   conversion procedures is the typename.  In this example the name NUMBER
is
   the appropriate.

   This minor change provides a valuable regularisation and aid to program
   readability and does not preclude the later addition of more extensive
   constructor functionality."

3. Specifications

Type names shall be treated similar to generic function names for the
purpose
of scoping.

The intrinsic structure constructor (if available) shall participate in the
resulting generic resolution.  The characteristics of the intrinsic
structure
constructor as a generic function shall be those which provide the same
syntax
for the existing reference; note that components with default initialisation
behave like optional dummy arguments.

The intrinsic structure constructor may be overridden by a procedure which
has
the same characteristics as it appears to have; in that way it behaves
similarly to intrinsic functions.

4. Syntax

Additional procedures may be given the same generic name as a type name by
an INTERFACE block, just as if the type name were a generic name.

5. Edits

To be added.
